- Of what we know for when we were kids

and previous generations,

we need to put that aside and we need to look

at the statistics and the dangers that are increasing,

cause this is black and white,

increase severe depression we know,

increase productivity in life.

We know in children right now.

So forget about that stoic mentality of when we were kids,

just get over it, and we have to address it.

I don't care what our ego tells us.

You have to address children differently.

When we're talking about depression

you look at the diagnostic manual.

As opposed to adults, we're talking about kids ranging

from four or five, to 17.

There is an enormous amount of developmental change

that takes place throughout that time period.

A five-year-old, hardly presents the same way,

as a 17 year old. - Yeah.

- What we tend to notice is,

preadolescence tends to be more irritable and oppositional

and defiant, and just a difficult child,

leading to a depressive diagnosis

but that's going to be that tip of the iceberg.

As you start to get higher and higher into the age range,

you may see more of the typical signs of depression

like they look sad, they look down, they are isolating,

they are crying.

They may be able to communicate with you a little bit

like, 'My life's sucks.'

So that's gonna change.

Don't forget and we've talked about this,

behavior is the manifestation of an underlying issue, okay?

- That's really good.

Really drive that point home because

we did in the ODD series,

but really drive it home for these viewers

cause that was a big game changer for me.

- Right so behavior is the surface of the iceberg,

that's what you're seeing.

That's that surface of the iceberg, right?

I see this behavior and the behavior is, agitation,

acting anxious or throwing a temper tantrum or talking back,

or, isolating themselves for a little while

or not wanting to go to school,

not wanting to go to practice.

But underneath it all the reason they don't

wanna do these things is because they don't have the energy

or the motivation, or they feel that it's hopeless

or they feel that it has no meaning anymore.

That's the underlying theme to why they're acting that way.

So you have to take that little tidbit of

that manifestation of behavior and say,

"All right, there's something going on here,

so let's look into it."

You see things like decreased interest in things.

I've had kids in my practice that present

and the parents would say,

"I don't know what his problem is

he's being so defiant, he's an all-state swimmer,

he just don't wanna go to practice anymore,

he just don't wanna go."

- Did my parents come see you?

cause that's really...

- I had no idea that that was you,

but I had a patient like that.

And they're saying, "I don't know,

is he just rebelling?

Is he just rebelling because we're encouraging him

to do this?"

And after I spoke with him,

I realized that this kid is depressed.

Because he was saying to me, "Doc what's the point?"

It really has no meaning to me anymore.

I don't enjoy it anymore I don't care if I win or lose

I just don't care."

This is of course a big one and very obvious,

talking about death and talking about life

and what's the meaning, the sense of hopelessness,

dealing with that case I realized

that he was a depressed guy and treating his depression,

helped him and he went on to be a really successful athlete.

And that's not even that important

the most important thing is that he was happy, right?

Right of course he was happy again.

You may see a change in energy levels.

All of a sudden they just don't have energy,

the same energy that they had.

You're gonna see a change in sleeping habits.

In another case,

I'll see a child that they're saying,

they're being resistant, they're avoiding school,

they don't wanna go to school in the morning.

And you know, you talk to the child and you realize,

again, they're just sad and depressed

and they feel no motivation.

They have what's called lassitude

where they just can't get ready.

They can't get out of bed and take a shower

and get prepared and get dressed,

and go through the structure of a school day,

because they don't have the energy or the motivation

or the desire and they feel that there's no purpose.

Now that being said,

there are a lot of other reasons

that they might not wanna go to school and

that can be an anxiety disorder,

it could be oppositional defiant disorder,

it could be rebellion.

But, my point is seeing that change in behavior,

may lead to a depression diagnosis.

- I really like this idea and this realization

that if your child is screaming and yelling,

what parents wanna do is fix the screaming and yelling,

- Right.

- So they punish the kid for screaming and yelling,

or they may be even worse reinforce the kid with a

toy or something to stop the screaming and yelling.

But we're not addressing why the kid is screaming

and yelling in the first place,

which could be depression or anxiety

or something like that.

- Well said, perfectly said.

And I'm gonna take it a step further and say that

if you're just decreasing the screaming and yelling

by providing some sort of tangible reward,

then they learn, that all I have to do is scream and yell

I'm gonna get what I want,

and the truth of the matter is,

getting that tangible reward is not gonna

ultimately make them happy,

it's gonna be a very temporary fix,

but that underlying isolation and depression is gonna grow.

Which is why you don't wanna do that.

You got to get to that underneath.

And I remember seeing this photo,

I bet everyone has seen this picture of the iceberg, right?

- Oh yeah.

- Where there's like the tip of the iceberg out

and there's huge, huge iceberg underneath.

I think that's a perfect analogy to something

like depression and how kids will present with it.

The preadolescence don't have the ability to understand

what they're experiencing and don't have the ability

to communicate it clearly, which you have to be

a very, very good observer as a parent

to pick up on those things.

The adolescent we talked about,

the average mood swings that kids have

and they do have that.

But if you start to notice

that they're not attending school,

they're not spending time with their friends

the way they used to.

They're not doing things that they enjoyed,

they're locking themselves in their rooms,

their sleep habits have changed

their eating habits have changed,

those are all signs of depression.

- Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below for more information

on how to access this full series

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a MedCircle doctor a question directly,

you can learn how by visiting the links

in the description below.


[Music]

we've covered how to spot a psychopath

or sociopath before but we've never gone

this in-depth on the clinical diagnosis

behind them antisocial personality

disorder

welcome to the med circle series

antisocial personality disorder

psychopaths sociopaths and how to spot

them I loved you in this series more

than maybe I've ever loved you it's it's

an evolving really then the reason

though is because I think you were more

brutally honest than you've ever been

you know listen I'll tell you this there

are some things we talked about on med

circle where there there's a lot of pain

and suffering for the person

experiencing it I think of our series on

anxiety disorders yeah I think of our

series on borderline personality these

are people are experiencing a lot of

subjective discomfort they really really

are this group not so much subjective

discomfort they're causing a lot of

discomfort for other people and that's

the thing you know and some people say

but but they had a tough start this I

said you know most people have a tough

start don't go out and victimize other

people and and the utter lack of insight

and the utter lack of commitment to

change and the fact that our culture

somehow Revere's and celebrates it's

like doesn't matter how you win the game

as long as you win

that kind of thinking is becoming more

and more normative yeah and people with

this pattern of antisocial personality

disorder psychopathy sociopathy and all

these variants they're advantaged in

that situation which means that there

means there's less empathy at the top

that there's you know less value on

things that make us human and connected

and have each other's back and it's just

sort of every man for himself for every

woman for herself rather than a sense of

community I as a psychologist have a

problem with that yeah so I was willing

to be brutally honest under these

conditions well it and when I say

brutally honest it's just you telling

the truth I know I really it's not it's

not you I don't and that people will see

when they watch the series yeah it's

just you tell

it like it is and that's and when we

deal with reality we can make better

decisions well I'm not I listen I'm

never gonna be your warm and fuzzy

psychologist I am NOT the sunshine rain

I get warm and fuzzy I do get warm and

fuzzy and I'm actually an

extraordinarily warm and fuzzy person

you know as long as it's it's reciprocal

and mutual yes yep but what I don't like

doing is giving people sort of

artificial feel-good moments mm-hmm that

actually set them up for another fall

absolutely I'd rather give them like the

real deal even if the real deal is

uncomfortable and then let them make

their decisions accordingly that's how I

engage in consultation and clinical you

know in clinical work and how I teach

students all of that you I can't

guarantee that somebody armed with that

reality will necessarily make the

healthy decision but I at least can rest

assured knowing that I gave them

accurate information do you think that's

why viewers respond so positively to you

do they respond possible i I get I get a

lot of comments on my social media and

my email my emails Kyle I met circle

comm send it my way I'm happy to chat

with you I get a lot of comments and I

would say there's they just really point

out to your little antidotes your

metaphors your big actionable advices in

a way that's changing their lives I

think people do a lot to me you know

what I think that when you're an

undergraduate teacher for so many years

and they're getting more and more

inattentive all the time so I'm trying

to keep their attention you do become a

teacher and I makes me so happy to hear

that you know you make you make this

content and you don't know if anyone is

gonna see it I have to say ten years ago

when I started working in this area of

more toxic and difficult relationships

if you will you know narcissistic

psychopathic sociopathic all of that I

was kind of laboring kind of quietly by

myself in a room thinking I'll reach a

handful of people and that'll be the end

of it and I'll grow old

it'll be fine I never dreamed that the

world would take the changes it didn't

nothing prepared me for this it was like

you were studying some weird obscure

disease that nobody cared about one day

it became an epidemic

and it did and there it was and so I

think that I what-what devastates me

I've said the Sun that circled frost say

it again is the loss of human potential

I see when people get sucked into

relationships where they're devalued and

invalidated and negated and dehumanize

and mocked and abused those people

people internalize those mocking voices

and they're echoes that play in there

and I see how much how much of people we

lose and how much of the their words

need to come to the world they don't

even think their words are worthy and

their efforts and their work and so it's

really about educating them about what

happened to them so that they can take

their lives back that's my personal

mission if it's reaching the viewers I'm

so happy to hear that but I think I know

it is and I hope and think that this

series will do it on an even larger

level I'm gonna ask you this question

but I don't want you answer right now I

want you to think of your your favorite

moment of the series we just shot okay

now it can't be me doctor Romani I am

NOT a moment you okay and while you

think of that I just want to tell

viewers what they can expect throughout

this series and remember you can go to

med circle comm and subscribe to watch

this series we talked about cluster B

personality disorders what they need to

know about that there are four

personality disorders in that cluster B

we talked about that that video is

separate from the series but we filmed

it today we talked about antisocial

personality disorder Psychopaths and

sociopaths what makes them different how

they are somewhat similar when they get

misinterpreted as a narcissism other

disorders that are often misdiagnosed

core co-occurring disorders we talk

about the causes of Psychopaths and

sociopaths are they born are they made

as if both we talk about how to spot -

the signs in a psychopath we taught

literally the questions you can ask or

the signs that you can look out of look

out for when you're talking to someone

both for Psychopaths and sociopaths and

then we go on to

about whether or not antisocial

personality disorder sociopathy and

psychopathy can be cured and what

treatments are available for those

people and then we go through what

supporters can do if you're dealing with

a significant other who has an

antisocial personality disorder if a

co-worker if a boss if your child does

what you can do actual big takeaway

pieces of advice from dr. Romani herself

this was a long series and we covered a

lot of stuff now what was your big

takeaway what was your big your favorite

moment I always welcome the opportunity

to see if we can ever get ahead of

heartache mmm and one thing I really

thought we were able to make the point

in this series is that when people you

know we're talking about psychic

relationships with Psychopaths or

sociopaths or people with antisocial

personality disorder that the writing

was on the wall from the beginning and

that if this might stop someone from

entering or staying in one of these

relationships oh or that they can impart

that wisdom to someone else

big that you know that the that the not

getting in in the first place is the

best prevention of all and the sense

that sometimes that sort of the the

desperate rush to get married to be in a

relationship and to let yourself get

blinded to patterns that are not good

for you

these folks often take advantage of that

that vulnerability and people and the

smoothness the glibness the you know so

many people out there in the world think

they don't deserve a relationship so

they'll enter into one with somebody who

doesn't treat them well and I think that

if people everyone deserves to be loved

and loved well yeah and that if it's

anything less than that to give yourself

permission to step away yes yes just to

step away and to step into some things

yes that is more valuable yes and to and

to learn to really value themselves for

I don't even say love yourself that

sound so cliche to learn to value

yourself because when you value yourself

you treat yourself with value and you

tend to be able to keep up the gates so

that people who don't value you don't

get in that you've got to be your own

gatekeeper ain't nobody else gonna do

that thank you you've got to be your own

gatekeeper you are precious in that way

protect yourself yeah I loved loved

loved loved loved loved that my big

takeaway was that I mean I had four

hundred thousand of them and I talked

about them in the series but is that the

simple act of consciousness and being

mindful mmm-hmm

can be that prevention yeah yeah or at

least can I lead you to those better

decisions that better life yep

and we talked about how to actually

apply that it's easy to say well be

mindful you know that's easy easily said

but we really talk about actual steps

that they can take what that looks like

when you are mindful so that you can

take your life and if it's already

pretty good make it great and if it's

not good make it great yes exactly you

said it in the series I want people to

live their optimal life best lives and

then best you know and just to honor

that and becomes you know to actualize

themselves to open themselves up to

potential and possibility so many people

feel that you don't have the right to

that it doesn't have to be anything

grandiose it could just simply being

life in a serene way in a peaceful way

you not to follow anyone elses formula

and I think that unfortunately when

people get into these kinds of toxic

relationships it's often because they're

not living authentically they're not

living honoring their inner voices

because I think then at those times

people may actually give themselves

permission to walk away if it walks like

a duck and it quacks like a duck it's a

duck

just a few people it's a it's a

psychopath her next book I that

resonates so much with me what you said

I mean I actually get chills and goose

bumps that resonates so much I know that

you will love this series you can go to

med circle comm and become a subscriber

you can

this series you can access other series

on a variety of mental health topics

that matter to you your education and

this education makes a difference in

your life

so take the time go to med circle comm

and subscribe and thank you so much for

taking your mental health seriously

[Music]


- Let me ask you when you think these thoughts

or beliefs first emerged?

Do you remember the first time

you started thinking,

"somehow I feel less than"?

When did you first recognize that?

- When my mom died when I was 16.

My first 13 years of my life, it was me and my mom.

So when I lost her, I lost

the number one person in my life.

Number one, I mean, number one by...

I don't want to cry on this thing.

Number one by a long shot.

Hi, Dr. Judy. Thanks for seeing me today.

- Hey Kyle, nice to see you.

What's going on?

- Well, I recently have been-

when I say recently, not recently.

So much of my life, I have felt

that I am lesser than,

and I'm putting that in air quotes,

that certain members of my family.

I feel very loved by my family,

very accepted by my family.

But, for example, my brother and father

have a very strong bond.

They work together.

They're interested in sports.

They travel together.

They do lots of stuff together.

And I have great relationships with both of them,

but I don't have as close of a relationship

with my dad as my brother does, for example.

And when I really start to think about that,

well, it makes me sad. It makes me...

Yeah, it makes me sad.

And it makes me also feel like, why am I not?

What do I need to do?

Who do I need to be in order to have

those types of bonds that I see

other members in my family have?

And it's kind of embarrassing

to say all this at 35 years old

'cause I feel like a little kid who's like,

"I want attention from my family!"

But it's kind of true;

I want attention from my family, you know.

And it was always manageable

and it still is manageable,

but it's harder to manage now

because I just moved back home.

So I see it all.

It's closer to me.

I'm less removed from it.

I'm in the middle of it

and I get to see everybody more,

but I also get to see those relationships

that they're having with each other more.

Did that make sense?

- Yeah, it does.

Let me ask you, when you think these thoughts

or beliefs first emerged?

Do you remember the first time

you started thinking,

"Well, maybe they're closer,"

or somehow, "I feel less than."

When did you first recognize that?

- I know, I know exactly what it was.

It was when my mom died, when I was 16, my brother was 13.

And at that, my first 13 years of my life,

it was me and my mom. Oh my gosh.

I mean everywhere, everything, me and my mom.

I recognize my dad and brother

are part of the family,

but in my head it was,

it was me and my mom.

And so when I lost her,

I understand my dad lost his wife

and my brother also lost his mother,

but I lost the number one person in my life.

Number one, I mean, number one by,

I don't want to cry on this thing.

Number one by a long, like a long shot.

And naturally,

as my brother and father also were grieving this,

they probably bonded together.

I very quickly went off to college anyway,

so I was separated.

So I think it was a combination of,

I think it was a combination of my mom going,

me moving off to college and being by myself,

and then I also just think there

are natural differences with me being gay

and my father and brother being straight.

We live in two different worlds, not completely,

but in certain areas, you know?

My experience in this world

is very different from theirs

specifically because I'm gay.

And so that, you know, it takes

a little more effort on both of our ends

in order to kind of build that bridge.

- Thank you so much for sharing that.

And it makes so much sense

that in this huge developmental phase

of your life, where you lost your mother

so tragically at that age,

that your primary attachment figure was gone.

So it makes you feel a bit less secure

about your bearings.

You've essentially lost your safe haven.

Or when we talk about attachment,

your secure base.

The person who you could always come back to

if you made a mistake or you,

you know, had a setback.

She's always going to be the person

who protects you and cheer leads you.

- And a person who I felt like

I didn't ever have to explain myself to.

It was an immediate, "You get it."

Like to her, to me... Even though I was only 13-

no, I was 16 when she died-

she was certainly a mother.

I don't want to paint the picture

that we were friends,

but we had a friendship as well.

I mean, there's no point.

And if she was alive today,

I really believe we would be

very, very close best friends.

- [Judy] Right.

- I also lost the only person

who I felt like saw me.

Because being closeted and 16

and felt removed from my family unit in some ways,

I was like, "No one sees me anymore."

And, you know what, Dr. Judy?

Sometimes I think because I felt that way,

that's why I have pursued a career

in front of the camera instead of behind it.

I mean, there's a reason I'm here

and not where Bridget is,

you know, behind the camera producing.

Because sometimes I feel like

I'm trying to be seen to get validated

for what I lost when I was a teenager.

- Right, right.

That because of your mom

not being with us anymore,

you need more of that frequent,

more frequent anyway, validation.

We all need validation as human beings,

but maybe you need a little bit more

than the average person since she passed,

because she was always the person

who validated you,

even if you didn't have to say anything about it.

It was just there, right?

And whereas maybe you feel a little bit more like,

you'd have to explain yourself more

to your dad and your brother,

and that you'd have to prove yourself

a bit more to them.

And that can certainly explain the dynamic

that you're describing.

So tell me about some of the specific thoughts

that you have, especially now that you're observing

your dad and your brother's interactions more,

that come up?

That cause you to kind of think back

on this idea of, "Maybe I'm not good enough"?

Or, you know, maybe even-

- Well, I'll answer that.

And I want to preface that this answer with:

I, at my core, believe that

these thoughts are not true.

And I'm only saying that

in case my family watches that.

[Laughter]

'Cause I really do.

What I'm about to say is not my core belief,

but they are thoughts that I have, I guess,

if that's one way to put it.

My thoughts are that my brother and dad

like each other more than me,

so therefore don't want to,

or don't necessarily need to

see me or hear from me as much as they would somebody else.

Sometimes I have the thought that

my place in the family

is a place I have to continually earn,

while other people's place in the family,

They get it without it.

It is unconditional.

You have it, you know?

Just because.

Does that make sense?

- Yeah, it does make sense.

So let's take one of those thoughts

and it sounds like it's not necessarily something

that's always rooted in reality, per se.

And that, you know, they've never said,

"Well, don't come around here.

We kind of like our two person dynamic."

- No.

- It's not like that at all.

It just comes up all the time.

- Oh my god, my dad and I,

I really do, I feel like I need to defend them

only because this is a semi-public thing we're doing.

I mean, even today,

my brother has texted me multiple times,

encouraging me on this little project.

And I sent him this gospel song that I like

because him and I both like gospel music randomly.

And that's all happened today, you know?

It's not as though my family in no way is like,

"Boo Kyle."

It is just me.

It's me. Sometimes I feel that way,

even though I couldn't blame them, really, for it.

- Right. Yeah, absolutely.

So this is a really helpful example for me,

and I want to introduce a couple of techniques

that I like to use using the theoretical paradigm

of acceptance and commitment therapy

to try to see if we can get some movement on this.

So let's go back to identifying

that specific thought that you have.

So whether or not you're

actually watching an interaction,

or it kind of just can pop up in your head.

Which, we know, is how thoughts work.

You know, it's not like you have

to be triggered by seeing them,

you know, hanging out on the couch together,

watching your show.

Sometimes it just comes up.

It can just come up whenever.

Tell me what that thought is once more,

in as specific terms as possible

as it comes up to you.

- Oh wow. Okay.

I am not worthy enough to be in this family.

- Right.

- Does that work?

- That does. And "I'm not worthy enough

to be in this family,"

as you can think about that thought right now,

how does that feel if that actually represented

what was truly going on?

I mean, how does that feel to you emotionally

and viscerally right now in this moment?

- Overwhelmingly devastating.

I mean, even saying it out loud feels so violent,

it feels like a knife going into my stomach.

It feels like somebody I cared about insulted me

when I say what I just said out loud.

I mean, it feels devastating.

Devastating is the best word I can come up with.

- Absolutely.

It goes to your core beliefs about who you are.

And if you feel that you

are not worthy to be within your own family,

well, it's kind of a common idea

that our families should be the most accepting.

And so if you're not worthy enough

to be part of your family,

then who are you, essentially,

worthy to be a part of in terms of the rest of the world?

And that, of course, is devastating.

So I really appreciate you sharing that.

But of course, as we've talked about,

thoughts are not necessarily facts,

but they feel so real when you say it like that.

And you can see the emotional devastation

one can feel when they really lock into that thought

and entertain it for any period of time.

So what I would like us to do is really

a couple of challenges that will help us

to loosen this thought.

Because sometimes, we become so fixated on the thought,

we fuse with our thought.

An in acceptance and commitment therapy,

we talk about fusion.

Like you fuse your identity and who you are

with the thoughts that you're having

as if they're one and the same.

So somebody could have a thought, "I'm a loser."

It's a thought.

It's a mental event.

But if you fuse with that idea,

well, what's going to happen?

You're going to have all kinds of negative.

self-defeating thoughts that cascade from that,

along with negative emotional reactions,

and also self-sabotaging actions

where, "Well, if I'm a loser,

then why even bother applying for this job?

I'm not going to get it." Right?

So you preclude yourself from

the opportunities of having better outcomes.

You don't even essentially

test out those hypotheses anymore.

- And you know what that happened to me

in May of this year.

I was in a really bad spot,

and part of my rumination was

where I fit in with my family.

And I even had conversations with some friends

when I was really at a low point where I go,

"I don't even want to reach out to them anymore.

I don't want to have to go over there.

I'm going to remove myself."

And it was, it's exactly what you just said

is what I was doing. Yeah.

- Yeah, and it's really hard to separate yourself

from a thought once you're fused with it.

- Yes.

- And in acceptance and commitment therapy,

we talk about these techniques called diffusion,

where essentially you are actively

trying to diffuse the bomb, in a way,

diffuse the bomb.

Because thoughts can be very devastating,

as we talked about.

Very destructive.

But also, un-fuse yourself from the thought.

Separating yourself from the thought.

Knowing that you are a separate entity

and that the thought is just a mental event

that you, as a person of agency, is having.

- [Kyle] Yes.

- And that can be very empowering

and can also help,

so that there aren't this

cascade of negative thoughts that follow,

along with the emotional reactions

and the self-sabotaging, self-defeating actions

that you actually just gave a good example of.

So my favorite way of working

on one of my diffusion techniques

is to have you actually write out

the thought that you just spoke to me.

So if you have a piece of paper handy,

go ahead and write it down on the paper.

- Oh, write down the thought itself?

- Yes. Write down the thought itself.

So, "I'm not worthy to be a part of my family."

- All right. Done.

- So how does it feel seeing the thought on the page?

- Well, it's a mixture of the devastation,

but also a little bit of like, "Get over at Kyle."

- Right, which is of force a judgment,

is a judgment of your thought,

like, "Wow, what's wrong with me?"

- Yeah, I am.

You're complaining about your loving, giving,

supportive family.

Like, who do you think you are?

Honestly, it's a mixture of those two thoughts.

- And actually you just gave

a great example of how these

secondary waves of emotion can be created.

Because then you judge yourself

for having the thought,

"Well, who are you to say this?

Do you know how many people are so much more

unfortunate in their lives?

And they don't even have loving families.

like they don't even have people

to complain about. They don't even have..."

You know, you can see how quickly it can cascade.

But let's do an exercise.

So most of the times when

we see these negative thoughts,

we try to push them away to some degree.

I don't know if you've had that experience

when maybe you try to like,

"Oh, get over it.'

I mean, that's one way, right?

- All day, Dr. Judy. That's what I do.

- Right. Or you try to cover it

or you try to reinterpret it in some way.

In many ways, when we do that with the thought,

we're struggling with it actively.

So imagine the thought.

You have the paper in front of you.

You imagine the struggle.

So the struggle usually,

I mean, I try to visualize it with with my clients

by saying, you know,

you're kind of wrestling with it.

So it's almost like you have to

take the paper in your hand and

you're essentially wrestling with it.

Both of your hands are occupied.

You're holding the paper in your hands.

So go ahead and do that.

Just hold it up. Right.

You're kind of wrestling with it.

You can see that both of your hands are there.

And maybe in some points,

you're just like,

"Oh my god, get away from me."

So you're pushing it out.

So go ahead and just like

push it out As far as you can.

Now, how does that feel,

even in your arms?

Is there a lot of tension?

You're like, "Ahhh."

- Yeah, I'm squeezing this paper

way harder than I need to be.

- Right. So you got all this tension

in your arms, and by the way,

now your hands are not free

to do other things, right?

You can't text somebody.

You can't look up something on the internet.

You can't write an email.

You can't work out.

Your hands are occupied.

But what if, instead of struggling with it,

we just put the piece of paper in your lap.

So actually, right now, if it's in your lap,

it's closer to your body,

than when you were pushing it away,

which caused a lot of strain

and caused you limitations and

other things you could do.

But now it's in your lap

and your hands are free, right?

So let me see your hands.

Yeah. They're free.

So they're free to do whatever you want to do.

They're free to cuddle your wonderful dog.

They're free to write an email.

But yet the, the thought itself

is actually closer to your body,

but you're not struggling with it.

- Dang! I see where this is going, I think.

- Yeah. So that's one of the analogies

that we use and ACT, by the way,

uses lots of analogies

to try to bring forward these ideas

in a more vivid fashion.

And it's this idea of,

"Hey, when you're struggling with something,

it actually precludes you

from doing things that are meaningful to you."

And yet, somehow, when the thought

is closer to you,

so they could actually harm you more,

because there it is in your lap.

It's like, "Ahhh!"

But at the same time, your hands are free.

You can do whatever you want to do,

especially things that mean something to you,

that matter to you.

And this is essentially one of the ways

that we start to work on this concept of diffusion.

So from here,

there's two ways to work on this exercise.

One is just to continue on this route.

And essentially, now you've written down this thought

and you can place it in your pocket,

put it on your desk, you know?

Somewhere close to you where you're going

to recognize that it's there.

And understanding that when it comes back up,

you can tell yourself,

"Well, yeah, I have this thought from time to time.

It's actually right here in my pocket."

- Yeah.

- But it's written down. It's there.

I've acknowledged it.

It's also a separate entity from me.

Obviously, it's a paper.

So it's not me;

it's a paper.

And I'm freely choosing to put it in my pocket.

And I'm choosing to acknowledge

that I have the thoughts sometimes

and still move forward with whatever

I need to do today.

What's on my to-do list.

The things that are important.

So that's one way that we can work on that.

And it's called "card carrying."

But I actually want to work on

another extension of this exercise,

which is to take the paper.

And I want you to write,

let me see how you wrote the thoughts,

so I can see where it's laid out on the paper.

Okay, perfect.

So now I want you to write it.

I want you to write,

I guess right now we write underneath it.

- Okay.

- And we would write,

"I'm having the thought that-"

And now if you link those two concepts together...

Go ahead and read that out to me,

starting with, "I'm having the thought that-"

- I'm having the thought that

I'm not worthy to be a part of this family.

I can tell you as soon as I wrote,

"I'm having the thought that-"

What it actually did for me just now,

is it actually opened up more of my brain

to really think about what I'm thinking about,

what I'm feeling about.

Because before, when you said,

give me that specific thought,

I was really in a place of self-judgment

and ridicule, because I was fused with it.

And I almost like this technique

as a way to explore my real thoughts.

- MM-hmm.

- Like, what other thoughts am I having?

Because I'm not so close to them anymore.

It's easier for me to identify them and say them.

Does that make sense?

- Absolutely.

And that's exactly the kind of reaction

many people have when they are able to identify,

"The thought is just the thought that I'm having."

So first of all, "I'm having" makes you feel

like you're the agent again,

"I'm having the thought."

"I'm having the thought.

The thought is not having me."

Right? "I'm having the thought that-"

and then you filled in the rest.

"I'm not worthy enough to be part of this family."

But now I would like you to add

another clause below that,

which is, "I noticed that-"

So now read the entire sequence together,

starting with, "I noticed that-"

- "I noticed that I'm having the thought

that I'm not worthy to be a part of this family."

Wow.

- Okay. So what do you think

that has added for you?

That last clause of, "I noticed that-"

- Well, two things.

One, space between me and the thought

and the fact that my brain

is a observer of thoughts.

Kyle is observing thoughts.

And so I can sit here, and me, myself,

and observe the thought.

It's like an extra step between thinking it

without being mindful.

And then, "I'm having the thought that-"

Well, that's still you,

and now you're the observer of your thoughts,

so it's one more removed.

It feels like you're getting

a 30,000 foot view of what's going on in here.

- Yes. I'm so glad that you said that.

And this exercise is really important

because it also establishes another concept

in acceptance and commitment therapy,

which is self-as-context.

So we talk about these different versions

of self and self-concept.

And oftentimes we talk about the identified self,

which actually, in acceptance and commitment therapy,

they call self-as-content.

So this is, "I am Kyle.

I'm smart. I'm no good."

It's these identifications

that we put on ourselves

in terms of our content,

you know, who we are, personality traits,

things that are likely to happen to us, et cetera.

But self-as-context is this really revolutionary idea

where essentially, the self-as-context is yourself,

the perfect version of yourself

that hasn't been through damaging experiences,

that doesn't have all of these broken

hopes and dreams

or negative ideals about yourself,

but rather is the observer to everything

that's happened in your life

and is a pure version of yourself

that is resilient and a senior-self

through all the ups and downs of your life.

A couple of other analogies

to explain self-as-context is

it's like, you're the chess board

and the chess pieces in each individual game

is kind of the outcomes of different problems

you might have in your life.

Sometimes the white chess pieces win,

sometimes the black chess pieces win.

The chess board sees all of these games,

thousands of games in its life,

but it's not particularly attached

to any single game.

Yet it's experienced all of them

from an observer level.

Another analogy is

as if you were watching a movie or a play.

You're the audience member.

You do care about the storyline on stage,

but you're not so personally invested in it

that it might cause you to do something

that could be self-defeating.

And so it's this idea of understanding

that there's the self-as-context for all of us.

That all of us can have this 360 degree view

and no matter what is happening right now,

we don't have to be attached to the content

as much as we're likely to do

because this is just the way

that the human brain works.

Another extension of this exercise

is to look at the paper that you wrote down this thought.

And of course, below that,

now you've written,

"I'm having the thought that-"

and below that again, you wrote,

"I noticed that-"

And even looking at the physical placement of the words.

You, Kyle, are farther away physically

from that original damaging thought,

and it's farther away from you physically, also.

So there's that idea of physical

distancing from the thought.

- Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

- And that can also be a powerful imagery

for some people. Where they can say,

"Yeah, before the thought was like,

right here, it was like crippling me and now, wow.

There's barriers in between.

There's like two layers of protection, in some ways,

between me and this thought

now that we've added these two clauses."

- Yeah.

Really fabulous. Dr. Judy.

I don't know why I would expect anything else,

but that was fabulous.

Thank you for that.

That was a real, I brought you real stuff

and you gave me real applications.

That was great. Thank you.

- Thanks, Kyle.

- Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below

for more information on how to access this full series

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you want to ask a MedCircle doctor

a question directly, you can.

Learn how by visiting the links

in the description below.


- I have pretty much been medicated my entire life,

from the age of nine 'til today.

I've had moments where,

for a multitude of reasons have gone off my meds,

and that has always resulted in a relapse.

I mean, it is the deepest, darkest,

I mean, life doesn't even make sense

when I get into that deep, deep space.

- I wonder what it's like

just to put that on the table to say,

we're gonna take a deeper look at this depression,

that this is what you wanna work on for your benefit.

What do you notice inside just as we get clear

that that's what we're gonna work on?

Hi, Kyle, what's the problem you'd like to work on today?

- Well, I was diagnosed with depression

when I was nine years old.

You think we would have figured it out by now, I'm 35.

I have pretty much been medicated my entire life

from the age of nine 'til today.

I've had moments where,

for a multitude of reasons,

have gone off my meds,

and that has always resulted in what I,

and at the time my providers,

would consider a relapse.

I never took myself to the hospital.

I was always able to find a doctor

who could see me right away

but it was, I mean, if I couldn't have done that,

I would have driven to the hospital.

I mean, it is the deepest, darkest...

I mean, life doesn't even make sense

when I get into that deep, deep space.

So that's happened probably, not probably,

it's happened three times as an adult,

each time corresponding to going off meds.

I'm pretty good with my depression right now.

I had a relapse, so to speak,

a minor one in May

when I was transitioning medication,

and that was disaster, not great.

So I guess, but I bring all that up to say,

I am still not...

I've still not been okay with or accepted

that I will probably be medicated

for the rest of my life for this depression.

I don't like doing that.

I don't like, every morning,

I have to take 40 milligrams of Prozac,

and when I take it, I go,

oh man, I wish I didn't have to take this.

And then when I feel good, my brain still says,

you got this,

like, I can do it.

I don't need this med.

But then the logical part of my brain reminds me,

if you go off of this,

in two to six weeks,

you're gonna regret it.

And I'm grappling with this.

I can treat it, I can manage it,

I know exactly what I need to do,

and I will do it,

because the alternative

is not anything I'm willing to do.

But oh my gosh, am I gonna be 95 years old,

and then taking this pill still every morning,

I don't know.

- Yeah, so I hear a couple of different things.

So, the depression has been an issue in the past,

it's not kind of rearing its head right now,

but concerns about medication

and whether or not

you want to be on medication long-term

and whether that's an option for you.

And, we can talk about medications

a little bit separately

in regard to when people do wanna try

and taper off medications,

unfortunately, they often come off very, very quickly,

and statistically people do better

coming off over like a year,

because if we think about the fact

that it takes four to six weeks

to have the full effect of a dose change,

then it's going to take that much time

with every dose decrease

for your brain to kind of recalibrate.

So we can really throw people into withdrawal

and pop their symptoms,

and you're mentioning there's some real conflict

over being on medication.

And so that's something that we can certainly look at.

I'm wondering what makes sense to you

as far as looking at the medications

versus looking at kind of the origins of the depression,

and maybe getting specific about

when your last episode was,

to be able to see if we can get underneath.

But we can take either path

that sounds right for you.

- Well, I think I'm the second path

of the origins of depression

sound more in line with what I would want.

- Okay, yeah, great.

And so let's make sure that we do what you want.

This therapy is yours,

and that we can really make sure that

we're focusing on your goals,

and so we can talk about meds,

but being able to understand what happens

is such a key piece in balance with the medication,

so that we can work on

how you might operate in the world

that might contribute to the depression.

And so we're clear, we're gonna work on

kind of getting to know about this depression

and how it affects you,

and maybe the origins of it.

And before we even get started,

I wonder what it's like,

just to put that on the table to say,

we're gonna take a deeper look at this depression,

that this is what you wanna work on for your benefit.

What do you notice inside just as we get clear

that that's what we're gonna work on?

- Oh, excitement.

And I know that that's probably an obscure answer,

I get excited for this,

because this is like

I've had this little ugly pet

follow me around my whole life.

I mean, since I was a young, young child,

five, six years old, I remember this feeling,

and so it's always here.

Whether I am medicated or not medicated, it's there.

So when I get to sit across from somebody like you

and say, all right, let's look at this ugly pet,

because I don't look at it that much, Dr. Lamb, I don't.

I work, and I see my friends,

and I play with my dog, I do my life

with this ugly pet.

So to have this space

where we're gonna actually look at this ugly pet

and see what we can do,

I get excited about that.

- I'm glad to hear it,

because for some people coming in, in therapy,

it can be really anxiety-provoking,

they may not wanna look, and so...

- Yeah, no, that's not me.

I've been in therapy since nine years old, I love it.

I get on the couch,

I'm like, hey, what's your name,

let's do it, let's get into it, I love it.

- Wonderful, wonderful.

So could we look at a specific example

of your last kind of relapse into depression,

what was going on,

and just start to get some details around it

so we can see if we can formulate

an understanding of what happens for you.

- So it happened in May,

ironically during Mental Health Month,

and it probably started a little before that

and went past May,

but May was really the big chunk of it.

A lot of things were happening.

One, Mental Health Month

is a big month for me professionally,

so we were very busy,

me and the whole team here at MedCircle.

I literally just now I was like,

right, we're doing MedCircle right now,

I'm not in therapy.

And so I was just busier than I normally was.

I don't know why.

Every year, whether I'm independent of medication,

I get depressed around that time, every year.

I mean, and I don't even anticipate it,

so it's not like my brain's going,

here it comes,

I just move through my life and I go,

wait, why is this happening?

Why is this happening?

And I go, oh yeah, it's that time of the year again.

It's like reverse seasonal depression or something.

The spring comes, and I just,

for that period of time.

Now, my birthday's in April,

I've had therapists tell me,

it's probably 'cause of your birthday,

and I really don't think it is,

but maybe it is.

And the other big catalyst...

And then I went off my meds,

I was switching meds.

I went from Prozac to something else.

That didn't work,

and I went into something else,

and there were gaps in there

that I wasn't on meds at all,

and that was a big catalyst.

And then the other part was,

I don't know what happened,

if all my friends got together and said,

let's all have a problem and bring it to Kyle,

but every single person I knew, it felt like,

was coming to me with huge issues.

I'm getting divorced,

I have a chronic illness,

my husband, XYZ.

I mean, major, major, big life issues.

And I gave them everything.

I go, here, you have all of me.

I got on flights,

I gave them everything.

I was like, here's my time, my energy,

my money, my resources, everything.

So when all of that came together

at the end of May,

I remember telling my dad and my dad called me

and he goes, how are you,

and I said, I'm not gonna help anybody anymore.

I'm done, I have nothing else to give.

I don't care who calls me,

what the problem is, I'm done.

I have nothing left to give anybody.

And then of course I'm like,

unless you need something to dad

then I'll help you.

But I just I couldn't do it.

I was drained,

I had nothing, I had nothing.

- And so is this a pattern for you?

- No, no, I don't think so.

And I am aware enough hopefully to know that there,

I'm sure I have many patterns

that I'm not aware of,

but I never recall in my life

giving myself so much to people

that I am drained.

I don't recall that.

- Got it, so is it accurate to say that

in other times in your life

you would set more boundaries

or let people know when you didn't have...

- Yes.

- So, just differentiating,

you normally set better boundaries as opposed to,

I don't really set boundaries,

but I just got a tsunami of needs...

- Normally I said,

well, now that you're asking that question,

I over the last two years

have really made an effort

to be incredibly empathic,

and I think that has a lot to do with my job

because I see it, I hear it, all of that,

so I'm trying to be really empathic.

And perhaps, the pendulum swung

too far to one side where,

and I'm not saying what I did is only empathy,

but it might be in the same house as other

emotions that may be good in smaller doses,

but all at once for me is a debilitating.

- Absolutely, I think for anyone that when,

it sounds like if I'm hearing you correctly,

that during this time

you put everyone else

ahead of your own needs.

- Yes, yes.

- And is that a pattern for you?

Is that a pattern for you?

- I don't think so.

I really think if you asked my friends,

they'd be like, nah, he's kinda like...

- He's pretty good at taking care of himself.

- I don't think so.

But I did have a psychiatrist tell me once

I was dating this guy who had a lot of issues.

And then, that sounded mean

we all have issues, but...

- But he had a lot them.

- Yeah, and I've also before my current career,

I was an animal trainer

and this therapist of mindset, Kyle,

you naturally care for things.

You have a whole job dedicated caring for animals

who are helpless.

I mean, they depend and rely on,

and now you're this relationship

where this person

is depending and relying on you.

You may wanna look at why you are finding yourself

in these scenarios and situations

where everyone's depending and relying on you.

And I said, yeah, maybe that,

well, and here I am years later in this...

During may or during that time period

where I was in that position again.

And I have control of all of it, Dr. Lamb,

it's not as though I could say,

I could have said, no,

I can't do that for you, I'm sorry,

I said yes to everything.

- Yeah, and so that we don't beat you up about that,

'cause part of that, your language right around,

I have control of this,

sounds a little bit like a self-attack

as if you should have done something differently.

And so I'm wondering if we can come into seriously

and try and understand why.

- Why what?

- Why during this time were your guards down?

Why during this time,

was there a draw to really take care of others,

at the expense of you?

- I know why, I know why.

I haven't thought about this.

I really, truly, truly, truly had not thought about this.

This is my theory at least

because then I didn't have to take care of myself.

If I'm taking care of everybody else,

then I'll have to think about me.

I don't have to think about,

I just moved to a new city.

Working remote has really taken a toll on me,

this is not meant,

I'm meant to sit in a room with you, Dr. Lamb,

not like this.

And if I can be a part of everyone else's problems,

then I don't have to look at my problems.

- Beautiful, so we get really clear,

that one of the primary mechanisms that you may use

to avoid feeling sadness, grief, over loneliness,

everything that came with new place,

COVID restrictions, all of this stuff,

you can be distracted,

you can avoid yourself by taking care of others

and what an altruistic thing to do,

but at the neglect of you.

And so we just start to see,

that there's something about sitting with

and exploring, and feeling

what you were feeling at that time.

Med changes that weren't working,

that's gonna bring up feelings towards the providers

that were made the recommendations

and the failed recommendations.

So there was something about being present

with what you were feeling

or what you were going through,

that whether consciously

or unconsciously made you anxious

and how'd you go take care of everyone else

to keep all of these painful feelings at bay.

So should we take a look,

at what these painful feelings were

that were coming up?

And as you think about it now,

what feelings come up as you reflect on

how bad it was in May

and what you were going through.

- Well, I hate to be the person that rebuttals this

without giving you an answer.

- No please.

- Part of what I was feeling was,

I recognize now we're due to me being

in this very deep state of depression.

And so it's hard for me to say to you, oh,

I was feeling disconnected from my family

because okay I was,

but I wasn't disconnected from my family.

I was depressed.

Does that make sense?

So to me like the depressed feelings

are kind of fake feelings.

That's how it kind of how I look at them...

- Super important to differentiate, absolutely.

So that you....

Well, there's a couple pieces here.

So there's a huge difference between feeling

or being in a state of depression

where our thoughts are hopeless,

we feel helpless,

everything is the worst.

That's very different than I'm connected with my family,

but I can't get on a plane and go see them,

and I've got feelings about that

or whatever the case may have been.

So it can become a bit of a chicken and the egg situation,

so that the depressed state

keeps us from feeling what we're feeling

and that this can get muddled.

People often don't separate out sadness and grief

from depression and they're very, very different,

and I think that's what you're highlighting, right?

Is that when you feel depressed

and when you're in a depressed state,

which in our model, would say,

this is a defensive collapse around real feelings

that were coming up after a year of being isolated,

having to navigate all of these changes, a new move.

And while you were connected with your family,

I'm curious how connected you were.

Because I think this is another place

where we can kind of sneaky self-attack ourselves,

like, well, I wasn't disconnected,

I was surrounded by people,

but if I felt completely alone with those people,

or if I wasn't really seen by those people,

if my needs weren't actually met,

I'm gonna have feelings about that,

and then I might blame myself,

well, they were there

but my needs weren't getting met.

So, I was alone and I did have feelings about it.

And so I'm curious what your environment

in regard to connection,

not just connecting to take care of others,

but you being seen.

In the midst of these med changes,

feeling really awful,

who was there to see you, to support you?

- Well, I mean, my best friend lives across the street.

So, he was certainly there,

and he was the only person I really told this to.

And when I told him,

I didn't even tell him the way I'm telling you,

I told him like, look,

we've known each other for 20 plus years,

I'm depressed.

Now I've told you,

I don't need you to do anything,

I don't need you to help me,

I don't need you to like make me dinner.

I'm just telling you,

this is why I'm isolating

or not wanting to hang out or whatever.

- It's really interesting with your best friend of 20 years

that there's a part of you that

really wanted to make sure

that there was no opportunity for him

to take care of you, to support you.

You needed even at moment to take care of him.

Well, in that moment,

you created an opportunity for you to take care of him

by telling him I'm depressed,

but I don't need anything,

let me take care of you

by telling you I have no needs.

- Yeah, that's true, yeah, geez.

Okay, yeah, that's true.

Yeah, no, you're right.

- And is that common for you

as far as like being potentially in dire need?

- Yeah, it is.

- Or no?

- It is common for me to handle it myself,

whatever it is, it's uncommon for me...

- Is that a problem?

- Maybe sometimes, you know, maybe sometimes it is.

- Was it a problem in May?

- Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.

In some ways it was the cause of the problems,

and then it was the prolonging of the problems

'cause looking back Dr. Lamb, I know,

well, I was just about to do it again,

I was just about to say all the things

that I could have done differently to handle this.

- You could have done to take care of yourself

and not be a burden for anyone else.

- Right, right, right.

I even, this is so... I even...

So I live in Phoenix.

I even like intensely looked at moving to Texas,

and my whole family is in Arizona.

And I have a lot of friends in Arizona and I was like,

this isn't working,

I need to go do my own thing and move in my own space.

I'm gonna go look at Texas,

and then I found it was the mosquito capital of the country,

and I was like, well, I'm not moving to Dallas,

but I really heavily looked at that.

It's not like I had the thought,

I mean, I went online,

I called people I knew in Texas.

I was like, let's look at me moving to Texas,

and this was in my deepest, darkest spot I was doing.

- How beautiful to recognize,

more parts of this pattern

where when you're feeling poorly,

that there's a part of you that says

I don't need, I don't deserve,

I don't want help, I don't wanna be a burden.

And it can come out in lots of different ways.

I can do this on my own,

but how does that hurt you?

- Well, I don't think I can really do it on my own at least,

and have the results that I do want.

So that's how it hurts me.

- Is that a problem of performance

or a problem meaning,

I could be wrong here,

but something about the way you said that

sounded like an attack on you,

like, I can't do it on my own

if I could, I should.

- Oh, right.

- Different from, as a human,

when I'm suffering and in need,

I shouldn't want or need this human desire

to be connected with and taken care of.

That there's real barriers to being seen,

to being taken care of or letting people in

to be able to support you and take care of you.

- Yeah.

- What's coming up as I say that,

what do you notice inside?

- Well, I notice now I'm overwhelmed

because I believe this to be true

and this being this kind of,

well, I mean, this is kind of self sabotage, so to speak.

And now I'm overwhelmed because I get to that point,

which a lot of people do and myself included in therapy,

where I go, great,

now we've uncovered all of this,

now what do I do?

It's like, what do I do with all of this?

- Yeah and so great to notice,

that as we start to notice something,

a mechanism inside,

I would in my terminology, I call it a defense.

As this defensive avoidance,

when you're feeling really poorly comes in,

pushing people away potentially

to get the care that you might want or need,

you can then attack yourself for doing it or jump to,

okay, how do I fix this?

But if we slow the process down

and we just get clear that

because first we have to really orient to the problem,

that these depressive episodes can come up,

hard feelings can come up,

and that the way that you've learned

to operate in the world, likely for good reason,

we don't learn this out of the womb,

we learn to not be a burden,

to take care of ourselves,

to be able to say, I'm good.

You know what? I'm so good,

I'm gonna go to Texas 'cause I don't need any y'all.

- And you know what?

You know where I went when I graduated college from Arizona?

I went to an island in Hawaii.

And sometimes I think about that and I go, man,

you really wanted some space.

And in the context of this conversation,

I think there was a part of it that I was like,

okay, I'm good, I don't need anybody.

- So this is a super important point about our defenses

is that not only do they make sense,

if we learned it's not okay to have needs

or to need to be taken care of,

or that we're seen as a burden,

we learned to not do that,

and then we get wedded to it and we get proud of it.

You're self-sufficient,

you can go to an island in Hawaii

and you can take care of yourself.

I got this, and you do,

and we don't have to demo everything that you learned,

it's not a complete demo.

But can we also create space that maybe

part of that way of operating,

when it's rigid,

when there isn't choice around it,

when it's unconscious and potentially impulsive

can be really destructive to you

and can keep you alone

and keep you hidden from other people

so they never really know how you're really doing

or know how to intervene to support you.

And so this is at the very beginning,

when we start therapy,

we have to get clear what's the problem,

what are the things that

how I may be operating

that may be causing problems in my life.

And gosh, as we look at this one,

it sounds as though it's really mixed.

There's a part of you it sounds like,

and correct me if I'm wrong,

that is really proud of your capacity to do this.

- No question, no question.

- I don't need anybody.

- That's right.

- And so then we come back to the question,

is it a problem?

- Is that a problem?

- Is it a problem?

- It is a problem,

I think for me to move through the world

with that type of mindset,

and the problem is that it keeps me from the potential.

- The potential of what?

- Anything, the potential of getting better faster,

the potential of being happier,

the potential of having closer relationships,

of showing vulnerability, all of those things.

- Absolutely, yeah.

That when we operate in this way,

which is super common, it's protective,

but it can have catastrophic effects on our relationships,

our capacity to connect, and our sense of gosh,

being able to rely on anyone, even a therapist.

Because if you come into therapy and you're good,

you could stay on that island on the couch.

And so before diving into all the feelings

and all that kinda stuff,

we have to get clear, what's an operation,

what's the root cause that may be perpetuating

some of this depression

and get clear, is this a problem

that I really wanna work on

knowing that there's a part of it

that I really wanna hold on to.

- Yeah, yeah, good.

Damn, really good, obviously.

- What do you notice inside

as we start to just identify this as,

I'd call it right now a potential problem,

'cause there's a part of you that's really,

wants to stay on that island.

What do you notice coming up inside?

Even feelings that come up towards me as I highlight it.

- My feelings are that I,

I don't know if it's a feeling,

but my thoughts are that

I have to go be by myself

and think about all of this

and maybe I shouldn't.

- Ain't that interesting?

Even here with me, as we start to connect

and start to get clear

about what you might wanna work on,

it brings up some feelings about connecting,

could get you anxious and say, okay,

I'm gonna go take this to my island

and go figure this out.

- I know, I really thought I was like, after this,

I have an hour break in my day,

I can go and really think about this by myself.

- You should go do therapy with yourself.

What's it like to just notice that?

- Well, it's kind of funny,

honestly, it's kind of funny.

I guess it's not too surprising

when it's all laid out there,

it's kind of like seeing a completed puzzle

when you didn't think you had all the puzzle pieces.

- And we could see how even here with me,

it could flirt the connection here with me.

- I'm in therapy with you and I'm like, God,

I gotta get rid of the therapist

so I can go think about this.

Yeah, yeah, that's avoidance or is it?

- Yeah, and any sense of what's coming up inside your body

of what you notice

as we're just kind of connecting here

and exploring this together.

Any feelings that come up towards me?

'Cause there's an impulse to get away.

- And I'm not just saying this

to try to be nice to you,

I don't think it's getting away from you,

it's getting away from this conversation.

It's getting away from

these things that are coming up

because there is an ease to living in my boxes

of not letting any one in, I guess.

- Right, yeah, there's an ease to it,

and yet it also can perpetuate that depression

and that isolation and the avoidance.

Because when stuff comes up for you,

there's an impulse to get away

and to potentially push people away.

- Oh yeah, beautiful.

- And any sense of the feeling

inside of you towards me that says step off,

what do you notice inside?

What's the feeling that comes up here towards me?

- Well, my feeling is that you're good.

To me, I'm like, she's doing her job.

- And then there's a part of you that then says,

oh gosh, she could actually get in here.

- Yeah, yeah.

- No, I need to leave.

And so what's that feeling of I need to leave

that comes up here with me?

What's the feeling inside that comes up here towards me,

that's like, don't get too close?

What do you notice inside?

- I don't know that one.

- Would you like to know?

- Of course, yes, I trust you, yes.

- So what's the feeling

that comes up inside here towards me

that wants to push me away?

What feeling do you notice coming up?

- Well, I don't know again, if this is a feeling,

but the thought of I got it from here.

- And if you're setting that boundary with me to say,

I got it from here,

what's the feeling that comes up here towards me?

- That I don't want you to be involved with this

from this point on.

- Any feeling inside towards me?

- I don't... The feeling toward...

- 'Cause that's a thought about what you want to do,

what's the feeling towards me?

If that feeling just comes out here towards me,

if we just let all your feelings be here,

what feelings come up here towards me?

- Well, now I'm feeling aggravated

that I keep getting asked the same question.

I'm like look I don't the feeling,

but now I've gone into aggravated frustration.

- How do you feel that in your body here with me,

if we just let that be present?

- Well, when I said that my face got really hot,

I probably went flush.

- Beautiful, so there's feelings

that come up here towards me

to try and keep me away.

And what's it like to just let that feeling

be present here with me?

- Uncomfortable.

- To be seen for your frustration,

like the frustration that as I approach,

there's a part of you that really wants

to be in therapy to connect,

and there's another part of you

that really wants to push away,

and this is where we start

is just seeing that

so that we don't have a fake therapy

because often people come in

and have really mixed feelings about being seen.

And if your front door is closed,

we can't really go

and take a look at your feelings and figure out,

and so then the work becomes here with you and me

to allow the space that there's a part of you

that wants to connect

and a part of you that wants to keep me at bay.

And that's okay, that's how most of us,

if we actually think about it,

engage in therapy,

we're ambivalent.

But if we don't look, we won't see that.

And then we do all kinds of things

to keep people at bay.

- Thank you for this.

- Absolutely, yes I know I actually have to end.

- We have to go.

Hey, I really appreciate it.

We'll end there and thank you for this doctor.

- Is it okay if even like off the record,

just checking in what that experience was,

this is an experience.

- It was really great

and I'm good and I'm very good and thankful

so I appreciate it.

It was really wonderful,

I'm just in my thoughts right now, so yeah,

and we are over time,

so you go do your thing and thank you, thank you.

- Oh my gosh, no, thank you for being so open and willing...

- Of course, you give me such a gift,

I really appreciate it, so thank you.

- Absolutely, nothing may come up,

but please do feel free to reach out to me

you know what I'm saying as we're...

- Yeah, I am very good, this has been...

This is great, this is wonderful.

So thank you, okay, all right.

Bye y'all, thank you.

- Thanks.

- Thank you again to Dr. Lamb, that was great.

I have a lot to think about,

and thank you for watching.

We are scheduled to do a part two of this video

where Dr. Lamb and I will kind of recap

what we went through

and discuss some of the things that came up

during this mock therapy session.

If you're interested in seeing that video,

make sure you subscribe

and give a thumbs up to this video.

It also helps share this content

with more people who could need it.

If you did make it all the way to the end,

leave me a comment,

letting me know that made it through the entire video.

Thank you for being here

and remember whatever you're going through, you got this.

Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below for more information

on how to access this full series

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a med circle doctor a question directly,

you can learn how by visiting the links

in the description below.

(logo swoosh)


- The idea that I would complain or think negatively

about my life sends me into a tremendous amount of guilt

because on paper it's so great,

but here I am exhausted, with anxiety,

and I feel guilty for it.

It drives me nuts.

Then I feel guilty for feeling guilty for feeling guilty.

- Can it be that today, I don't feel great inside?

Where did you get the message that certain forms of pain

are more valid or allowable?

(upbeat music)

Hi, welcome.

I'm Dr. Ramani.

Kyle, welcome to my virtual office.

It's so nice to meet you.

- Thank you.

I'm glad I'm here, I need it.

- How are you feeling?

Then also tell me what you mean by, "I need it."

- How am I feeling?

Well, I'm tired today,

but that's just cause I'm alive and awake.

So if I'm awake, I'm tired.

When I say I need it, I am not new to therapy, okay?

I've been to therapy.

I just haven't been to therapy in a while.

For the first time in my life,

I'm in therapy for reasons

that I haven't been to therapy for.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm.

- So part of me is irritated with myself

that I have not been more on top of this.

I feel like I'm a little late to the game.

I know I can catch up,

but that's what I mean when I say I need it.

- Now you shared a couple things I want to follow up on,

but you started by saying, "When I'm up, I'm tired."

How long have you been experiencing

this level of fatigue or tiredness?

- Well, I was born in 1986 so probably around there.

- Oh for your whole life, okay.

- My whole life.

I've been to sleep doctors and other doctors

and gotten all the tests and done all the diets.

I could easily sleep 12 hours a day

and take a nap in the middle of the day.

Anything less than that is me pushing through.

Obviously I cannot run the life I have for myself

on 14 to 16 hours of sleep a day.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

- So, yeah. I'm tired all the time.

I know that that impacts my mental health,

but there's just no way around it that I have found.

- So your whole life, like even in childhood, adolescence,

you've had this history of this long-term fatigue

and you've seen medical professionals,

mental health professionals, sleep experts,

and none of them have really shined light

on what this is about.

- The conclusion is that I have Crohn's disease.

I had a surgery that took out part of my stomach,

so I don't absorb nutrients- - Got it.

- I need.

I was also diagnosed with depression

when I was nine years old,

and when that is rearing its head,

my side effect is more exhaustion.

- Yeah, yeah.

So I think it's a combination

of chronic long-term depression and chronic Crohn's disease.

- Okay, so Crohn's disease being an auto-immune condition

and it really, in essence,

also is sort of your body attacking itself.

It can also be made worse.

Auto-immune conditions can be

made significantly more severe or debilitating

if a person's under stress,

because they're mediated by the immune system.

In many ways the stress is sort of like

the puppet master of the immune system.

And on top of that, you have depression.

How long have you had a history of depression?

- Well I was diagnosed with the depression at nine.

I've been diagnosed many times since, throughout adulthood.

I think that the true first symptoms of...

high levels of anxiety,

a lot of thought processes and cognitive distortions,

I suppose there would be,

were probably around six or seven years old.

Then it finally came to a head when I was nine

and my parents were like,

we gotta get this kid to therapy.

- Mm-hmm.

Thank God they did.

And I'm medicated, I'm on 40 milligrams of Prozac

and I've been on many antidepressants over the years.

- Over your lifetime, the therapy, the medications,

has it helped with depression?

- Oh yeah.

- Yeah, okay.

Absolutely. I mean, helped is an understatement.

- Okay. Mm-hmm.

- Therapy and meds are the reason

that I can do this mock therapy session.

- Given how much fatigue you've been experiencing,

your history of Crohn's disease,

and your history of depression,

how does all of this come together

to affect your day-to-day functioning?

- Well, that's a long question-or a long answer.

One thing that is new to me is

the guilt I have for feeling this way.

- Mm-hmm.

- I have a fabulous life, oh my gosh.

The idea that I would complain

or think negatively about my life

sends me into a tremendous amount of guilt

because on paper it's so great.

But here I am, exhausted with anxiety for

the second real time in my life,

the first time I was six years old,

and I feel guilty for it.

It drives me nuts.

Then I feel guilty for feeling guilty for feeling guilty.

It just continues on.

- Right, so in essence, you feel guilty

for having a normal reaction to your life?

- I guess I don't look at it as super normal

because I don't have the stressors

that I hear other people have.

I hear about stress.

I hear about trauma.

I hear about what people are going through,

and I'm not going through that.

Yet there's a part of me mentally that responds

as though I were.

Even saying that out loud, honestly, Dr. Ramani,

I'm like, ugh, God, like, get over yourself.

Like, you don't have anything to be upset about.

- Okay, so...

do you feel guilty when you feel hungry?

- No.

- Okay, but you have access to food,

you have a kitchen I'm guessing,

you have money to buy food.

So why should you ever feel hungry?

- Ah, I don't know.

I don't know.

To me, that's not comparing apples to apples.

'Cause my internal monologue is,

how dare you feel like you have something to be upset about

when you really can't identify anything to be upset about.

- Okay, I understand what you're saying,

but you do you see what I'm saying?

You have a natural experience of hunger

and you allow yourself to feel it,

and you're like, well, better get something to eat

'cause I'm hungry, and you don't judge that.

But you have set up in your mind this idea,

what I'm hearing, is that it's almost as though

you're viewing stressors or misfortunes

or problems quantitatively.

And only if you get over a certain level,

is a person allowed to feel bad.

- Yeah.

- What's the number, Kyle?

- Yeah, you nailed it. - 1-100 scale.

- You nailed it.

You sound like my dad.

My dad has told me, Kyle, you're the guy who goes,

well, I only lost one leg, I have another one.

He's like, you're allowed to be upset that you lost one leg.

You nailed it, you nailed it.

- But you see what you're doing Kyle, even here.

It's like, I lost the leg.

Can't it be that I got two legs

and I got a functioning body,

but today I don't feel great inside.

It's as though you require, or you believe

that there are certain valid reasons to feel bad,

and if you don't have a valid reason,

then it's somehow shameful or wrong.

- Yes.

- So then you feel guilty, yeah?

- Yeah, that's exactly correct.

That's exactly correct.

I didn't have the awareness of it

going into this mock therapy session.

So I guess just for time's sake,

what do I do now with that awareness?

I'm in this session, you provide it for me, I get it.

Sometimes that's enough.

I leave, I go home and I go, oh my gosh.

I don't allow myself to feel normal feelings.

I judge the feelings I have unless they are

compared to something to warrant those feelings in my head.

- Yeah, I wanna ask you though, I wanna understand,

the only way to really fully understand the tree

is to understand its roots, right?

What do you think the roots of this are?

Where did you get the message

that certain forms of pain are more valid

or allowable than others?

- I assume somewhere in my childhood (laughs).

- Right.

- I can't recall something

right off the top of my head.

I also think it's a symptom

of the nature of some of the work that I do at MedCircle.

I get a lot of emails from people sharing their lives.

I am so thankful that people feel comfortable enough

to do that.

But I don't know how well-equipped I am

to go through an inbox every day

of people being abused,

people dealing with suicidal ideation,

people struggling with children who are struggling.

That's a lot for me to take on,

and so after I read all that all day,

and then I go, oh poor Kyle,

you live in a nice apartment and you have a great dog

and you're healthy, but you're tired,

and that's what's giving you anxiety.

You don't have the right to be tired

because we just got an email from Mrs. Miller

who is struggling with her two kids' drug addiction.

- So in a way, Kyle, you're sort of your own perpetrator.

- Hmm.

- What I'm hearing in you is interesting.

It's something I actually hear.

As you know, from looking at my website before you came in,

a lot of the work I do

is in this area called narcissistic abuse.

Helping people who are going through relationships

with difficult, demanding,

and often quite judgemental people.

But it's almost like you're in an abusive relationship

with yourself.

The people who are in these relationships

I tend to work with,

they invalidate their partner's emotion and say,

what do you got to complain about?

You know what, why are you so sensitive?

Why are you getting so difficult, why are you being so...

you're acting like a child.

So they invalidate the emotion of their partner

who's merely having an experience and they judge them.

You're kind of a one-stop shop here Mr. Kittleson,

because you've sort of done it all in your same person.

You have a part of you that gaslights yourself.

- You're right.

- There's this interesting dichotomy within you.

One of the healthiest places we can get a person to

is where they don't judge their own emotion

because emotion is like air temperature,

stand outside long enough, it's gonna change.

It passes.

But with emotion,

if we judge the emotional state we're in and shame it,

try to wall it off, it will come back and bite us.

If we don't allow it to be expressed

or someone else doesn't allow it to be expressed,

again, we wall it off.

Then we have all these compartmentalized parts of ourselves

and we don't become a whole authentic person.

We're almost our own worst enemy at those times.

What we're then doing is, we're deriving our sense

of how we're even allowed to feel from the world.

In essence, we've outsourced ourselves.

- Hmm.

- I'm wondering for you,

can I ask you, are you in a relationship?

- I'm dating someone.

- Tell me about this person you're dating.

- I actually told him about you a while ago,

and I said, yeah, I ended it.

I asked for your opinion and you said,

it seems a little quick, harsh,

and now we're seeing each other again and it's been great.

- Okay.

What do you think your experience, as a gay man,

and it shapes the process of development so differently,

to be a boy.

I think those journeys are still very difficult,

but mercifully we're having more open discourse,

but for you, there was a coming out journey.

I'm wondering how much you see a connection

between any of the experiences you have

in terms of your self-judgment,

the judgment of your emotion,

this dichotomized self we see in you

and even your history of depression

and how that might line up with your process of coming out.

- Wow.

Woo, geez.

There is probably a part of me

that expects more of myself because I'm gay

to prove to everybody else that ha ha ha, joke's on you.

You thought I wasn't going to amount to X, Y, and Z,

and I did that plus more.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm.

- So when not in that state,

if it's anything less than like 10 out of 10,

the self-judgment starts.

I think probably when I was 22, 23,

I'm 35 now.

I had some, what is that called, Dr. Ramani,

this is an over simplification,

but it's when gay people don't like themselves

for being gay.

- Self-loathing.

- Self-loathing, yeah, the self (indistinct).

There was probably some of that.

I don't even need to say probably, there was that.

I remember telling my friend, she asked me,

if you could take a pill to be straight, would you take it?

I was like right now, God, every morning.

That'd be so much easier.

I was in my early 20s, I was an adult.

Now I would not do that.

- Right.

- But that's where I came from, if that helps,

if that gives you an answer.

- It helps a lot, because if I could take a pill

and not be gay,

inherently negate part of my authentic self, right?

- Yes.

- For you that compartmentalization has been there.

Like you said, you've gone through your process.

You've integrated your identity.

You're clear on that.

To be a gay man,

that's this you,

this isn't an "oh if I could make this go away"

because there was that self-loathing.

Again, that self-loathing

is magnified through the lens of society.

The self-loathing doesn't come up from anywhere.

It comes from the biases that society has

against any individual that's a member of one or more

marginalized groups.

That internalization of that is such a quiet process.

Sometimes we're not even aware of it.

Then we may turn it inward, judge our emotions,

judge ourselves, label ourselves negatively,

and we'll think this is all an internal process.

When in some ways that process is society.

We internalize these messages from society

and we think they're our own.

- Mm-hmm.

- So it does make me wonder how much you

judging something as integral and human as your own emotions

is sort of a lifetime of having judged yourself

and who you are.

- Yeah.

I mean, the short answer is that is a large chunk of it.

- Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

So in our work together,

I hope that we can talk about this more.

That you find spaces where you feel

that you can be you authentically, genuinely,

and not feel that you're being judged

or valued conditionally.

But also Kyle, there's a reality to this,

the nature of your work,

where you are reading difficult stories from people's lives.

There's an actual toll to that.

It's actually called compassion fatigue.

People who have to compassion a lot, you wear out.

No more than any other muscle.

If you were lifting stuff all day

or digging ditches all day or fixing roofs all day,

you would be wearing out different parts of you.

In the case of what you're doing,

reading these really difficult stories

that people are sharing with you in a vulnerable manner

is having two impacts on you.

One, that compassion piece,

but the second, it's activating this ancient shame for you.

- Wow, yeah.

Wow. Okay. Yeah.

I mean (sighs), you're really good.

You're really good.

You're really good, Dr. Ramani.

You're really good.

- That's good, thank you.

- That was really good.

That was really good.

I'm a little irritated, to be honest, 'cause it was so good.

(sighs) Really good. Thank you.

I don't even want to talk about it anymore.

- [Dr. Ramani] Okay.

- Yeah, that was really good.

(uplifting music)

I have questions about all that.

- Okay.

- About our therapy session.

- Awesome.

- One, how much of...

we've known each other for years now.

How much of that history

did we have impact this type of session?

- I'm going to be frank with you, Kyle.

Again, because I was doing a mock therapy session,

I was really trying, obviously I had pieces in here,

but I also, even with the little bit you gave me,

like for example, I was trying to set it,

I know you're a gay man

but I didn't want it to be presumptive

since we were sort of laying it out

as though it's the first time I'm meeting you

and all of that.

But not as much as you would think.

What you gave me was enough.

- And what did I give you?

- You told me how you're feeling.

You told me how you've been feeling like this

for a long time.

You gave me a glimpse into your mental health history

and your physical health history,

and how they kind of come together.

You let me know that you obviously had solicitous parents

who encouraged therapy,

but then you really were able to pivot into this space

of being able to talk about the guilt

and then ultimately the shame you felt

about having any

negative thoughts about your life

in light of the fact that people have it so much worse.

This kind of...

it's a very...stoic kind of,

who the heck am I to complain when people

have it so much worse?

I have to say, when I hear that, it always concerns me

because at some level I often think to myself,

this person is going to be perceived

as so strong by everyone.

Like, you're right, what do you have to complain about?

But, I have to tell you,

I once read this book by a woman named Dr. Edith Eger,

and she did such a beautiful job.

She's really like a very female parallel voice

to Victor Frankl,

and in her book, it's called "The Gift,"

she writes about this idea of,

so often we feel like we either don't get

to complain about our lot in life

because some people have it worse,

or she gave a great example

of a person getting aggravated at someone,

like a therapist getting aggravated at someone

for complaining, thinking,

how could you be complaining about this?

Thinking 'cause a therapist two hours before her

might've been hearing someone with a much worse problem.

What Dr. Eger says is that the therapist has to be

sort of masterful

at being able to...

At being able to understand that

everyone's crisis is their crisis

from a subjective point of view.

For one person, not being able

to get to their nail salon when it could open

felt tragic to them.

For another person, processing the suicide of their child,

and you're like, can these two things be compared?

Dr. Eger would say yes, because in both cases,

that person had a negative mood experience

and we don't get to judge it.

I have to say her writing has been quite influential for me.

And again, builds on Dr. Frankel's work as well.

So it's this idea that we don't get to judge,

not as therapists,

nor do we get to judge ourselves as individuals.

Your pain is your pain.

So that theme really struck me hard about you.

Then I wanted to get to the core

of where that came from,

and that's where your history came in.

I do know you're gay.

I knew that very much of the people who have statuses,

who maintain, who hold roles,

I should say role statuses, that are marginalized by society

are often the ones who judge themselves most harshly

because society already does that for you.

That societal judgment almost passively gets internalized.

As a result, people who live

within marginalized roles and statuses

are more likely to self-pathologize than other groups.

- Yeah. You really nailed it.

You really nailed it.

When you tied it all together at the end,

I felt all of it being tied together in my brain.

- Hmm, okay.

- That's how in line it was

with what was going on in my head, what you were saying.

Which really made me feel heard.

I think that was my reaction,

was not just as a realization of where these feelings

are coming from,

but also, oh my gosh,

this woman in 10 minutes

understood what I was talking about.

I've been to a lot of therapy, Dr. Ramani.

Those moments that I just had with you truly in 15 minutes,

I don't have those every therapy session.

- That's good.

- It's a build.

I don't have any good questions (laughs).

I probably have some stupid questions

- There are no stupid questions.

But Bridget, are there any good questions

I can ask about this?

I'm too emotional right now.

- You know Kyle, first of all, thank you.

I'm glad we were able to do something

that would teach people.

Let me tell you though,

part of what I think we were able to do here,

that I hope and wish more people would get in therapy.

That's that idea

of understanding those internalized societal messages.

I think that too often therapy doesn't integrate that.

We're so focused on the closed system of the individual,

that we don't weigh in

on what structural systemic issues do to a person

and how that can actually be a major driver

to our mental health.

One of the biggest problems to me in psychotherapy

is the unwillingness to consider all of that.

The outsideness of it all.

Listen, I practice in Los Angeles,

and a significant proportion of people

bring at least one kind of marginalized status.

Whether a gender, race, ethnicity, whatever.

It's not like I'm saying that that's

the sole explanatory mechanism,

but it really does help sometimes

understand that volley between in and out.

I think a lot of people don't think of it that way.

Why a lot of people don't,

is they're almost afraid of feeling like

they're blaming the world for their problems,

or they're putting themselves in a victimized stance.

At no point were you doing that, if anything,

you were really almost self-shaming, self-harming

and self-gaslighting.

So it's to sort of break you out of that cycle,

because for me the win with you would be

for you to give permission to yourself,

to be able to be okay with not being okay.

So that you'd get back to okay a lot more quickly.

This idea that my feeling sad and my feeling tired

doesn't get to happen because someone else

lost a child or lost their job,

it's comparing to...

it's not even apples and oranges.

It's like...hammers and cows.

There's literally no...they're not even fruit.

They're not even common.

- Right, right.

- I think that one of the problems is,

is that we have this sort of intersubjectivity.

Like, I can only judge my experience

on the basis of someone else's experience.

We humans do that.

We're a tribal species.

We tend to look outside of us.

But it's also being able to know that

no more than I judge myself,

for example, let's say it's a warm day and I feel cold.

It's tempting to say, oh gosh,

there's something wrong with me, I'm cold.

I'm cold!

We tend to be more comfortable

doing it with physical states.

I'm cold, I'm hungry.

That sort of stuff we don't judge,

but when it comes to our emotions, we judge.

That's what I would love for-

if we had worked together, what we would keep working on.

(uplifting music)

A few takeaways, Kyle, would be, number one,

is pay attention to how you talk to yourself.

If someone was talking to you

the way you were talking to yourself,

you'd be like, hey, hello, you need to step back

because this isn't okay.

- Yeah, except way meaner.

- Yeah.

Most of us accept from ourselves far, far worse

than we would ever expect from someone else.

Part of this becomes mindful self-monitoring

of your own self-talk,

Which is never easy to do 'cause the self-talk

is such a passive experience that's internal to us.

I'd love for you to spend more time

being more mindful and aware

on how you talk to yourself.

Number two, I'd love for you to do

almost like a one or two week experiment,

where you honor your moods and be with them.

So when your body is telling you you're tired,

instead of saying, oh my God, Kyle, what's wrong with you?

So many people have it worse, say,

almost talk to your body.

Maybe not do it in front of other people,

but honor your body and say, you're tired?

Let's go rest.

And take care of you.

Instead of yelling at you,

take care of you.

Let's go take rest.

I think after a while, once your body

and your psyche

connect and feel confident, like our host has got us,

we'll be okay, we know we're gonna be taken care of,

together, you might actually feel better.

Does that make sense?

- Yes.

- If know I'm going to someone's house

and they're gonna be like, you want to take some rest,

you want to take a shower, you want something to eat?

I feel taken care of.

But if they're like,

you're gonna do everything on my agenda,

and I'm gonna wake you up at four in the morning,

and then I'm gonna make you go to bed at 10.

We're gonna only talk about what I want, eat what I want.

I'll be like, I don't want to be here,

and I'd feel tense and upset.

Well, I want you to be a better host.

I want you to just sort of work on some of that

very simple self-compassion, listening to yourself,

because I'm hearing you won't take advantage of that.

Like you won't say, oh I'm gonna say in bed for two weeks.

I think you'll say, I got my rest, I'm good.

And you know that you'll honor your need for rest

when you may need it at a later time.

Those would be two things

that I'd really want you to work on.

Again, especially that mindfulness.

Staying in the moment, being with your feelings

and not judging them.

As a third enhancement, you may want to consider journaling.

Journaling can take a lot of forms.

Sometimes people are like,

I am not writing dear diary every day.

I'm not telling you to do that.

Sometimes it's as simple,

I tell some of my clients,

you don't feel like journaling every day,

give yourself a little rating.

I actually have an app

and it goes off at whatever time it goes off.

I can actually rate my moods,

if that makes sense.

I can rate my...did I have a good day?

Did I have a bad day.

Am I tired? Am I sad?

Am I this? Am I that?

It gives me a chance to just touch base

and over time I get data.

I can look at that data over time and say,

oh, wow, that was a bad week, or this is a better week,

or what was it about that day that was better or worse.

Keeping that either through a mood tracking app

or jotting a few things down,

watching the ebbs and the flows of time,

that can help too.

- Well, just so happens,

I started bullet journaling yesterday.

So here we go. - Oh good! Perfect!

I'll incorporate the other two.

And this has been fabulous.

I mean, thanks for the therapy, Dr. Ramani.

- You got it.

My pleasure.

I'm glad it was helpful.

- You can watch more with Dr. Ramani

right here on YouTube or medcircle.com.

I'm Kyle Kittleson.

Remember, whatever you're going through,

you got this.

Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below

for more information on how to access this full series,

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a MedCircle doctor a question directly,

you can.

Learn how by visiting the links in the description below.

(upbeat music)


music playing

When someone hears the phrase 'multiple personalities' it likely stirs up images from the

1976 movie Sybil, or perhaps the opposing characters of Jekyll and Hyde.

Popular culture would have you believe that people with multiple personalities are dangerous, and few and far between.

however an estimated 150 million people experience dissociative disorders

What is it like to live with multiple people in one body?

Today, you'll meet two people, Encina diagnosed eight years ago with dissociative identity disorder who has

11 personalities and you'll meet Minnie, the three-year-old girl who lives inside Encina's body

Alright, Encina, tell us where you're from.

So, I was born in California and lived there until I was around five years old and my

family moved to Arizona, and I've been there ever since.

And you have a unique diagnosis of having dissociative identity disorder?

A lot of people know that as multiple personality disorder. When were you diagnosed with it?

I was diagnosed; I think I was about-- it was like 22 or 23.

Okay. and what led to the actual diagnosis?

I started having a lot of amnesia feelings which a lot of people are, you know, they

They could think of as a normal thing. You know, you forget what you have for breakfast the day before

And it just became so big that things were happening

it's really hard to explain until you're actually like kind of going through it

That I was seeing therapists regularly and

And Uh

It it was just a diagnosis that ended up happening.

So you're having these events in your life. Where you Monday morning? Wake up and you can't remember what you did over the weekend. And

Wednesday at night you're going to bed and you're thinking what did I do this morning? What did I have to eat?

And you don't think too much of it because people forget stuff but then after 20 to 23 years of this

You're seeing a therapist and finally the therapist says look you have dissociative identity disorder

Yes, but I've been seeing therapists even before then, but it ended up coming out. Yeah. Yeah, that's what it was and

when you you're Encina talking to me right now, yes, but you have

Eleven other alters that you can go into.

Can you tell me about each one of those? Oh

So I can tell you about

Basically I have five primary alters

which are the ones that I--

You know if I'm gonna switch I switch into them very regularly

Um, and

uhh

I have one that, I usually,

in the past

I would switch into almost every single day every day

-every day? -every single day.

And how long did you switch into her, that person?

So, she would come out, uh,

For hours at a time, and sometimes for days at a time -but did this go on for months, years, days?

This was like years. Absolutely, Yeah.  -So, let's talk about her.

Okay, so, It's gonna sound kind of weird. So basically

Let me start from the beginning a little bit. So,

People with DID, they get it by having

Traumatic

reoccurring childhood experiences that were just like

unavoidable and it's repetitive usually so it's a lot of like, you know, just different kinds of

harming things that are happening to these people that are just

Super traumatic and you're saying from your understanding

It's not just something that occurs once but something that's occurring getting more regularly.  -Yeah, it's absolutely more repetitive. It's stuff

That's absolutely reoccurring

and

people with DID they get it around the ages of like

Newborn to around six to seven years old so you can't get DID after that time

so

To kind of describe it

Everybody starts out with multiple personalities if you can kind of imagine that and then as you get older,

you know, your personalities come into one person if you've

experienced trauma

Reoccurring trauma as a child, you know, usually before that age those ages

Your personalities stay split and as a child

These traumatic experiences are going to create these different personalities and these different

'alters' if you will, and

Basically

They're what you're taking from around you so some people will have alters that are like animals

some people will have alters that are completely

like

nonliving things like rocks

Which sounds very odd?

But it's it's what you know as a child what can protect you and those alters become your protectors

so it's not a

bad thing that they're there

Do you want to talk about what happened in your childhood that caused you to develop DID?

So, I don't remember the majority of my life up until like around six years old.

I have like very small little clips, I guess but like only a couple of them.

But I know that it was a

sexual abuse thing and it did happen with

My father along with like some of his friends.

And you know this happened, but for the most part you can't remember it so

It wasn't up until I started seeing my therapist and I started like becoming more

aware of my alters and knowing they were

So when my when I first started understanding that I had DID

obviously your first

Thought and first want to do is to fight against it. I don't want this. I don't want multiple personalities

You know, it's not a good thing like you want to get rid of them

You can't get rid of DID. You can never even get rid of an alter. They're always going to be there

when the so these things happen to you when you were a kid and

Then through your teens and early 20s, you were experiencing symptoms of DID, but it was undiagnosed

Mhm

And then you went to therapy and got diagnosed with DID and you total have eleven

Alters five of which are primary, but one used to come out every day. Let's start with her

Okay, so she is her name is Minnie and she's a three year old girl

And that's one of your alters. She's one of my alters now, is she you?

When you were three

No

So she she was like the first one the next one that ended up coming out

Was Devin and Devin is Minnie's?

Caretaker if you will so if there's something that is happening that a three-year-old shouldn't be seeing she'll take over instead

Devin will take over. Mhm. So Devin's a girl. Mm-hmm. Yeah, so Devin will come out. Mm-hmm

It's kind of like Minnie has DID. I feel like and he has to become Devin in order to

kind of kind of

so like if a traumatic experience is happening like the first thing in alters like

The first thing that they want to do is they want to help so what they do is they take over

So that's what they would do when I was a child, you know

If a traumatic experience was happening to me as a child

They would take over they would basically drive the body if you will kind of like a car

Are you aware that you've been taken over?

So usually I wasn't because I wasn't aware of all of that. But as

You know, I went through life and I started experiencing

Okay, I get dizzy or I get kind of like like tired and things like that. I started recognizing that okay

I'm getting ready to switch

and as I started to work with them instead of against them it became a lot easier and it became like

Okay, I'm going to switch they're just going to take over. It's not a big deal. Okay, fine. We started to

communicate with each other through a diary and

Which was the only way that I could communicate with some of them. I've never even met all of them myself. I

am Co conscious

With five of them meaning if they're out I can see what they're seeing if they decide

So they can decide to kind of block me out

if

I'm not Co conscious and I'm completely like in an amnesia state then, you know

It's usually one of the other alters or something else is happening one of the six. Yeah

When is the last time Minnie came out?

She actually

Doesn't come out as often anymore. I was in some pretty

Abusive relationships and she would come out all the time because of that

but

She hasn't been out for about a month now all month. Mm-hmm. Okay? Yeah, tell me about the last time she was out

what was the context it was just kind of playing around and

Just hanging out at the house, and she comes out and she wanted to color so she colored

She's got her own like coloring books and stuff

And how long was she out? Um

Maybe an hour

And were you co-conscious

Mhmm. Yea.

experience being Co conscious with many so

Let me let me put it like this when

When many decides to come out she kind of she does this thing where it's kind so she doesn't front fully meaning she's not taking

over the body fully

She'll kind of like peek through my eyes to see who's around and see a it's safe for her to even be herself

and if it is

She'll take over the body she fronts and she will be herself doing what she does and

If she feels kind of nervous

It's her way of holding my hand

If I'm Co conscious if I can see meaning if she gets a little too nervous then I'll just take over again

if she's completely like oh

I've got this like I'm not nervous with this person. It's okay. Sometimes she'll just block me out

And meaning like I'm kind of like an amnesia State. Hmm

Is that scary it used to be it used to be really scary because

When I go through

things like anxiety when it's like a really scary anxiety or something where I feel like very

unsafe, basically, I

Go through a lot of amnesia stuff, and I've had times where you know

I would be watching TV or something and then I'd wake up or come to and

I was like in the middle of the street somewhere else and I was like, where am I?

That doesn't happen now

But it did in the past. Why do you think it doesn't happen as much a minute? I think it's just because

Me along with my alters. They we know that we're not in a dangerous situation anymore

We're not so as your life improved or di D has improved. Yeah

Is that a common?

Is that common with people who have di D? I I believe it is

Yeah, as long as you're taking care of yourself and you're you know, seeing a therapist still at least, you know

Make sure that it's somebody who knows what di D is and how it works then absolutely, you know

Who who knew being with a supportive?

Boyfriend, you know what helped?

You are in a relationship and it is a healthy relief. Absolutely a hundred percent. Yeah that relationship you think may have helped

Curb the instances of having these alters. Come on. Oh, yeah

100% you know it you go from being in one relationship where you're terrified for your life every day

And then you go to the next one where you're just like you feel so

Safe, so content like it nothing could over bad like happen to you again when you were in those terrifying relationships

How often were your alters coming up every day every day every single day and how what percentage of those times?

were you not Co conscious you were in an amnesia state the majority of the time because I felt

very unsafe with the person that I lived with and what happens if you're just driving in a three-year-old alter so

that's why Devon is

Her protector to make sure that that kind of stuff doesn't happen

So what if Devon wants to take over and then she can she's she's 26 years old. Yeah, whew

We were in the car. Mm-hmm as encina neared right and in Devon takes over. Mm-hmm and Devon's driving

Yeah, and you get pulled over. Mm-hmm and the police officer officer says do you know I pulled you over?

and Devon says

well, we were going I was going a little fast and he says I want your driver's license and you hand it to him and

It says encina and then he says what's your name?

And you say so Devon will say encina Devon will say encina the alters. So basically the alters

Stay hidden

There's like three main rules for alters to stay hidden

Unless if they're welcome, you know unless if you know like oh this alters gonna come out

I I believe you are an alter. I know that you're not faking

I'm not just doing this as like Oh, show me a trick type of thing

To keep the past a secret

To keep it safe basically and to keep the body safe

So within those three things if they're doing those things they're doing their job

but there are people who have DID and their alters come out and

They're they're not keeping the past a secret and they're they don't care who you are. Usually when it comes to the past

That's that's why the majority of people don't realize they even have di D because they have had amnesia in the past

They don't know what happened to them in the past

They don't know why their mind is working the way that it is and why they're blacking out and why things are happening

They don't understand

Real quick. Can you list your alters and give me a two to three sentence bio-forge? Oh my god

Let's move past that no too much. Yeah, let's move past that no Mikayla, that's it. But why why is that? It's

There's so much detail with all of them

Like I so I basically in order to talk to all of them. Like I said, I have this journal they all have different

Handwriting's they all have different ideas. You have this journal. Yeah. Yeah

it's it's something that it's the only way I could communicate with them in order to actually like

understand what was happening to me because if you

think of this

as

me and

Encena I am also considered an alter

How do you know that Devan isn't the real Encena right? You know, and I'm just the one taking over right?

You know

it's a very scary thought for the person who has the ID because you never know with which like

Personality is actually the one that the belongs

Yeah, the very original is that appropriate to say the real one or the original?

The original, yeah

Because I mean because in encina's personality who I'm talking to right now could just be the one that made it to the top. Mm-hmm

Yeah, which is why does that bother you? It's not that it necessarily bothers me. It's

It's more of a thought of like

There's still so much that I don't understand about it. Is that why you don't want to go through your eleven alters they I

Think it's just because they're

They they have their own lives as well

And not all of them want to share everything about it so

Again and I don't I'm not pushing your answer. I've never even met all of them personally

Like I've only talked to some of them even just through paper

So

my I have a couple of friends who have met like all of them and

They're even a reason that I know of some of the personalities

Because because you've never met him I've just never met some of them

so can I

Think most people would will be interested in

learning about these personalities

So we we have many mm-hmm three-year-old. Mm-hmm

dominant personality comes out the most

We have Devin minis caretaker. Yeah. Now there are three more primary ones. Can you talk to us about those? So there's

Evolution of listen Evelyn. Mm-hmm

There's a Laura now all women all women you have any male alters. I don't

I

have

So I have twin alters Quinn and Quinton Quinton considers

Her himself to be kind of versatile. Oh

That's the only alter that I have that's like versatile like more gender fluid. Yes, okay

I also have an alter. That is a fairy

Like not a human. Hmm. That's a Laura a Laura. She's one of the primary five. Mm-hmm. Let's talk about a Laura

what does what does she protective so she is I

Mean, they're all gonna protect in some way or another

but she's basically like a

Very calm rational like what can we do to get things done and situated, you know, things like that. Um,

so

What does she like I know she's calm rational let's get things done

What it like how does she talk how does she sit like what he talks she talks very calm

She's like thousands of years old from what she says, you know, she's a fairy so she

I think she's she's been one of the primary ones, you know, because as a three-year-old, you know

you are trying to believe in magic and stuff and I believe that's kind of where it came from right now us as

The person you know the Fronter

I

Don't create altars if that makes any sense like I'm not like thinking

Oh, I want this kind of a person so it becomes an altar like it's just that just happened

Yeah, that's what you know. Yeah. I think that's a really important thing to understand people are gonna be watching this and thinking

Well, this girl's got blue and purple hair and she's thinks that sometimes she like is a fairy

I think that's what people are gonna think. Oh, yeah, what's the response to that the responses?

I mean

the the only thing I can do is just put out the information that I know what I've gone through my

experiences whether people believe it or not like it's

It's not gonna hurt me I know what I'm going through every single day, you know, like

So if people are going through it as well, it's nice to be able to find other

Resources that can help yeah, you know well and that's why we're doing this. Yeah, you know, it's

You know we were talking

Early on about how there are doctors and therapists and psychiatrists who think that this is not even

God not even something to be treated because it's a joke. It's silly

And not too many decades ago

that was the same response for homosexuality, you know, and so as we continue having these discussions and insight and

Doing the research

I

Think the stigma is slowly slowly removed a big stigma also is

That D ID is rare and it's not what makes you say that so if you look up the statistics

It the D ID

affects people, you know the one to two percent of the population of the human population, basically and

Bipolar disorder is 2% of the population. Mm-hmm

Like there's a lot of other disorders that are also in these small

percentages that seem small but when you really think about it that is 75 million people -

150 million people that have been diagnosed

Yes, 875 million 250 million people have been diagnosed with bipolar disorder

And Eid or an another 75 250 million

Yeah, and those are the diagnosed people. Yeah, that's just the diagnosed people

That's that's you know again, I didn't know that I had it for 20 years

Yeah, we we've talked we've done a few video segments on

Bipolar disorder and the amount of that that goes undiagnosed it was staggering

Yeah, you know people just think oh you're depressed or a lot. You have these moments of where you're just killing it for

Yeah, right, but you know, it's an actual disorder that has to be treated. Mm-hmm. Do you have any alters that are?

dangerous

No, I had an alter when I was like a teenager

That would come out

and

cause a lot of trouble again

It was me thinking that I was just a troubled person because things would be happening and I'd be like, why am I?

Yelling like this or why am I this angry?

I don't know

14 15 16 around that age

And even my mom would be like you're like a very troubled teen like what can we do for you?

But you the reason I asked how old you were. Mm-hmm

Every teenager goes through that 14 15 16 year old they get an attitude. They're yelling or screaming whatever

Yours just happened to be a symptom of something that most people would never even think. Yeah. Yeah

So my mom just thought for a long time. I was this troubled teen and

Going through the therapy and stuff we were able to

basically kind of

I'll say this in an easy way for people to understand it kind of mend her into the other alters as well

So she's not like her own singular

Angry alter anymore. She has become kind of a part of the system as a whole of the system. Mhm

So interesting how you think that terminology you used? Mmm-hmm

Well, that's why a lot of people with diid they call their system a system

They call their all of their altars in general to together. That's their system. Some people it gets so

detailed and so

Like intense because of how deep their di D goes again. Everybody's is different

but

With mine I've been able to

Make it to where I'm not struggling against it anymore. Yeah

I'm going to say something that I'm sure some people will say that's not politically correct and how could you say that but

There are those who?

Study di D dissociative identity disorder and say that it could be

the first superpower of

humans, mhm because for example the New York Times did a

story on a woman who either as herself or as one of the alters was blind and then as

an alter herself she could see so let's just say she as

herself as

Jessica will say mm-hmm could see but then as an alter was blind there have also been cases of people who said hey

I'm Kyle. I don't have diabetes

You can take my blood. They go into one of their altars

They take blood and those blood tests come back as being positive for diabetes

So if if that is true

Mm-hmm

And you can have blood that is diabetic and then not diabetic and the same human being just because something busy all busy all

Something's going on. Yeah that that's a superpower. Mm-hmm. Do you feel like it's a superpower? I

feel like people in general have like

Power if if you will, you know

You have the power to make yourself a happy and healthy person with work. Everything takes work, you know

So, I mean I don't want to say it's a superpower as in like

one of us is going to be able to fly and the other one can't but I mean

I I believe these situations is to be true as well

are you happy that you have the ID I am now because without it I would have

Traumatically experienced every single encounter

that happened to me that caused me to have the ID I would have

You know remembered it and it would have been like a this is happening to me

Basically, so my alters took over I was blocked out. It happened to them if you will and

There will be there were easier this who would say you need to go through that though, I feel like the therapists are more like

you have to

Remember the past and go through the work to heal from the past in order to heal from it

Yes, but not necessarily like you should be getting raped

That you should

Understand the past. Yes, so you can get absolutely and that's that's what happened

My alters ended up coming out and saying like what happened to me and like how it happened

So you have gone through so I've gone through the healing. I've gone through the

You know work and I'm still going through it. You know, I go through it every day problem. Yeah

So

like one of the the hardest

Instances that I I went through. Well one of the most frustrating ones when I was kind of fighting against this

was

Devon came out. I became friends with a group of people who knew of Devon and knew of my alters and such

But Devon ended up

Being in a relationship with somebody that I wasn't in a relationship with so I had to share my time with the body. I

Had to know okay Devon's gonna come out and go on her date

I'm gonna come out and have to go to school like it was a really frustrating time

Were you Co conscious mm. Not the majority of the time

So you as the body who are dating this person, mm-hmm, but unaware of it

I mean I'm aware of it because I've been told they're dating but when you're out to dinner with this person, I'm a damn

No clue. I don't we're not there. Mm-hmm. Couldn't say who the person was where you went

I don't know what I had to eat. Mm-hmm. And then you so for me also as

One of the statistics that you were talking about

I

am

very sensitive to gluten and

My alters are not

So when you if right now if you had gluten you would notice the effects

Yeah, but if you were Devin, mm-hmm all good all good Wow. Mm-hmm

Oh great, but how would you know that if you're not aware? Oh, well, sometimes you are aware

Yeah, sometimes I'm aware and like they you know

so when I when I eat specific kinds of wheat or bread like I get really tired or I kind of

Get a little loopy. Yeah, and they're fine

It does not affect them whatsoever

Eating bread eating right? Yeah

When you meet somebody

When do you tell them or do you tell them you have di D?

I don't

Tell everybody if I'm if I'm really close to somebody

Then you know, I might let them know

But for the majority of the time like I'm not just going out there and be like, hey, I'm encina

I have the ID, you know you're in a relationship. When did you tell him? I told him it?

took a couple of months, but

You know, I ended up telling him and he's never met anybody with the ID and most people have him. Yeah, so

he was very

skeptical about it like most people are and

He started to understand, you know how it was as he was spending more time with like many and stuff so he's met many and

What does he think about that? Oh, he's I mean, it's a normal thing now like he's like, okay

You know you have di D. That's fine. And so many just shows up and he

Hangs out with a three year old in an adult woman's body. Mm-hmm. Yep

People are gonna hear that. Oh, yeah. How is he doing that and how are you doing?

I mean that's just gonna be the reaction. Yeah, but you guys have made it work. Yeah

Wow, that is really fantastic

When you tell somebody, mm-hmm, I have dissociative identity disorder or multiple personality. What is the reaction

a lot of people, you know their only

Experience from it is from Hollywood

MTV yeah, things like that. So they're gonna think oh the Jekyll and Hyde thing they're gonna think oh,

are you dangerous some days and not dangerous other days, but

I

Think that's the majority of the reaction that I get is like, oh, do you do this or does this happen?

What are the questions you know questions like, you know, oh

Do you do you get really angry at times and laughs? Like where does that come from? Like? No. Yeah, it's it's

They're normal people

Yeah, so yeah, but it's they're normal people but it is not

common

Do you have someone who has 11 different personality? Mm-hmm. Some of which that you wouldn't even know you were being yeah

But right now I am talking to unseen

Yes, and if I was talking to an altar, would that altar lie to me possibly?

So there is just two chance. I'm talking to an altar

That is just saying there encina

So I'm gonna say no because I haven't seen it

But I know but I get what you're gonna be others say that absolutely get what you're saying. Yes

So there's a chance though if they don't feel safe

They're gonna pretend that they're me if they feel safe and they just are doing their thing then they'll be themselves

Do you know let's assume you are presenting a cocina

Do you know how they feel about all these cameras and lights and craziness? Yeah

Yeah, so I actually had a youtube channel like in the past

and I wanted to

make light of di D not in like I'm making fun of it, but they

Let's not take it so seriously and make everybody think that people with di D are

You know psychos right? They're gonna kill you or anything. So I

started making YouTube videos and I would have my altars come out I would have

Some videos where I would basically ask my altars questions as me and then they would respond as so I was a lot of cutting

Like of the video and you would have to wait until your altars came out to do that

Yeah, so I would have my friends help me film it and stuff. So it was a lot easier to transition into those. Can you?

Voluntarily bring out an altar if they want to come out. Yes

and only the ones that I'm like Co conscious with really

Otherwise like it's it's usually just a traumatic experience

Or some kind of like a trigger that will bring them out. So many and Devin. Mm-hmm would be

The most likely to come out if you were going to get robbed. Mm-hmm, okay

How has it affected your relationships I

Don't feel like it actually affected any of them like negatively I

have been in a lot of

abusive relationship relationships in the past

But that wasn't because of my alters it was just because these people were very abusive

and now that I'm in a very healthy relationship, it's it kinda is just

It is what it is. I guess I don't know. It's hard to kind of explain

Yeah, it's fine what was the worst experience of having diee

The worst experience would probably be

going days

Without knowing what was happening

not knowing where I have been or what I've done or anything and

Don't like tell me about that. I

Mean if you wake up, you know days later and

You're like where am I? It's a scary feeling? That's probably like I I can't

Say that one is like harder than the other necessarily. It's just it's all a very scary experience when you're

Not understanding or knowing what's happening

when people

Ask you to explain

What it's like to have DID or what? It's like to have an alter come out. How do you explain that to them?

so

One description that I could tell you maybe

Think of this think of your body as a car. Okay. You're driving your car

you're in the front seat and

You're doing your thing. So I'm driving my body, you know

imagine someone

Takes you out and throws you in the backseat

Now they're driving. You're in the backseat though

You can fight for control of the car or the body

You might not always win that fight

You can see what's happening just like you can you can, see in the car. You're just sitting in the backseat.

You can hear what's happening or what's being said

so that's kind of like as if

Minnie had come out, but she was holding my hand so I can still see I'm Co conscious. Mm-hmm

Say someone stuck a bag over my head threw me in the backseat now

I can't see where the body or the car is going. I can't see where I'm going. I can't see what's happening,

I can hear though. So it's kind of like a wall has been placed in front of my eyes

And that's another way of being Co conscious to a point, but I can't see, I can hear. Imagine someone

Let's see, someone threw you in the trunk. Okay. So you're in the trunk of this car.

You know that the car is going you can't hear what's happening. You can't see what's happening. You don't know what's happening

That is a type of amnesia that is happening to the body and then imagine somebody has

Knocked you out

thrown you in the trunk and

then

Drove around did their thing, whatever, and then put you back in the front seat before you woke up and then you woke up.

So, now maybe this car is parked in a parking lot or the body has walked somewhere.

You don't know where you've been, that's full amnesia. That last

experience is what most people think of when it comes to DID, but there's a whole level of

like different types of

switching or

Amnesia, or, you know alters coming out or not.

If that makes sense, I think that makes perfect sense. I think that will be the metaphor that people

Understand the most without having DID. Mm-hmm, but it amazes me that today,

you're happy you have it. Yeah.

I'm very thankful.

If an experience happens that like I just can't handle. I know that they have my back they're there to help me

Mmm, so it's not you know a bad thing

What type of doctors do you see and how many do you see for DID?

So, unfortunately, I still haven't been able to find a doctor who specializes in DID, in Arizona that is close to me

I have spoken to doctors who believe the ID and who are very

Reassuring when it comes to it and stuff and who will still talk to me, about it, and things you know,

like let me be me and let the alters come out and such.

But I I haven't been able to find very many that actually like

are close to me and

specialize in it. Do you take medicine for this?

I don't so there is no medication that you can take to stop switching, or to stop the DID.

You can take medications to help with whatever other kinds of diagnosis you have

So most people who have DID. They'll have you know one of their

alters will have bipolar or they'll be depressed or they'll be

They'll have like a heart condition, you know, so they'll take medications for those specific things those other mental disorders

But there's nothing that you can take for DID

Specifically, to stop it. I know you don't want to and I'm not asking you to. Mm-hmm. But why?

Why would you feel why do you feel uncomfortable?

Trying to bring Minnie or Devon out on camera

So I don't feel comfortable with that because it's it's not my choice. It's their

You know their own person as well, and if they wanted to come out they absolutely could

Minnie used to come out a lot and

She's come out with the majority of my videos and stuff that I had in the past

She's met the majority of my friends that know that I have DID

But

she's also

She has her own feelings, too.

You know, as a three year old and you have people who, you know, who were my friends who loved her, and then

You know, disappeared and then they're not there anymore. So she she has her own level of like

'Don't leave me', type of thing, if that makes any sense as a three-year-old would. Yeah. So, and none of your alters age.

Mm-hmm. So Encina gets older, which is not

always the same with everybody. Some people do have alters that age, mine don't.

If you could have all your alters lined up, mm-hmm all 11 of your personalities,

Would there be

some of them that you would love to sit down and talk to as Encina? And what would you say to them? Oh, absolutely

because me and Minnie have been so close for so long, you know, she's she's the

first alter that I know of that would come out as a protector and

She I

Can hear her voice I can see what she's doing like they have their own

World inside. Can you see what she looks like? Yeah, I can see what she looks like, everything. And what does she look like?

Silver hair and she has like a little beauty mark. She's really tiny. She's really cute, like

it's...

Hi hi

You're Minnie?

Yeah

mmm

I'm Minnie. I'm I'm three

You're three? Mm-hmm. What do you think about all these cameras?

A lot of cameras. Mm-hmm. And do you like Encina?

Mmm, yeah, she she's she like my mommy she

What are those? Those are -unintelligible-

What's your favorite animal?

I like my kitty cat mHm, what's your cat's name? Uh squish. Oh squish?

Mm-hmm, and we has another one. Um, he name is (grr?). Hmm

He he's he's a very very good one. He scared all the time though. Now why?

Why did you decide to come out and say hi to everybody? Hmm?

But because my mommy did their videos like this a long time ago, I would do those ones, too

And we have we had lots of fun. We had my my mommy's other friends would be there, and they will help out Jude with the videos

Yeah, and it was it was oh, it's a lot of fun cause I got to color and then got to do lots of games

Okay, I like it. Okay, good. So, what's your favorite game?

umm

I don't know, I like a lots of them

I used to go to the park all the time and and we would go and and go on the slide and go around

Like that and and we would play a lot

okay, and

You like Devin right? Devin's great. Yeah. Yeah and

Are there any other friends that you like?

My mommy had lots of good friends that I like to

II like Alex, it's that and he's really good to me. Mm-hmm, Alex is? Mm-hmm.

Okay, yeah and

Did you go to Disneyland recently?

yeah, yeah, and we go on the rides and they're lots of fun and

Devin likes to come out too, to play on them. Yeah, uh-huh. Yeah, and they're lots of fun. Yeah and

How long have you known Encina?

Mm, all the time. Hmm. She she's not go no where um,

She always there. Mm-hmm and do you, do you I know this is a big word, okay, but do you know

What dissociative identity disorder is? what my mommy say that we have? Yeah, but do you know what it is?

It just

Makes lots of people be your friend. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And so you're you like it then uh-huh

Yeah, and you like encina? uh-huh and you feel safe with her? Uh-huh, and Encina likes you too

- Mm-hmm And what's your favorite food again?

I like ice cream and now when you leave here

Where do you go?

mmm I have like my own house in

Inside, too - you have your own house? I live with Devin. With Devin? Mm-hm. And what does your house look like?

It's a big one

mmm, I have my own bedroom and we

mmm

We play in there lots. Mm-hmm.

That's where I go, if we ever have to do other things if if

Mommy has to be out

Okay, so when mommy comes out,

then,

You go to the house and play and stuff with Devin?

Okay, cool. And so when was the last time you came out here?

Mm-hmm. I'm not come out like very many that much more. Um, but

We we can see

We can see what happened. So you can see what's going on, you just don't-

- you don't have to you don't always come out though. Yeah. Yeah and

Are there things,  do you wish you came out more? Are you happy to stay in your house?

I like to come out more I got to to come out and play and color

And what? I mean, I like to color. Oh, and

color. Mm-hmm, okay

Good. I'm glad you came out. Yeah, and I'm glad you're not nervous with all the lights and cameras

There's lots of people. Yeah, and all the people. Yeah, but you're good on TV. I'm

Okay

And so, now, what are you and Devin doing tonight?

Mmm, we'll probably color

Color. Mm-hmm. Okay, that's good. Yeah, we can make lots of pictures. All right. I love it

So what else can you tell me? Hmm?

Well, yeah, what do you, do  you has an animal?

Yeah, I have a dog. He's a puppy. Yeah, you saw her earlier

So you like animals? Mm-hm and you can you have two cats. Uh-huh. Yeah, do you think the dog would like the cats?

Mm-hmm. Yeah Kitties  might be scare. Of the dog? Mm-hmm. Yeah, but they'll be okay. Yeah. Yeah and

What ,are you okay with water, or do you want something else to drink?

I don't want nothing

You don't want what? I don't want nothing. I- You don't want anything? I'm not fussy. Okay? Oh, you're not. You're easy,

you're an easy three-year-old

A lot of three-year-olds are not they're much more difficult than you. Nope

yeah, I try to be some some friends, but

It's very a hard they don't look like me. hmm, what do they look like?

They is littler and because I'm in mommy it's

It it's get scary sometimes

mmm, why gets scary?

They is little and they don't they don't

They  not be my friend. like other three-year-olds? Mm-hmm. They don't want,, other three-year-olds don't want to be your friend mm. Hmm. Hmm

But you have Devin though.

Yeah and

Mommy. Mm-hmm. So they're your friends. Uh-huh. Yeah

and two cats

What's so funny I just like kitties oh

All right, so then Minnie, when you're ready to go home, how do you go home ? I guess

My mommy come out. Oh, okay. You want to go get her? Oh

Okay

How are you feeling? good, a little nervous why are you nervous? very nervous Um

Just it's it's a

Big

It's a big thing to

Let Minnie out in front of like people that I don't know. Mm-hmm

It's nice when I'm able to cuz I know that like Minnie really appreciates it because she can be herself

But it's really nerve-racking for me

Was that person were you co-conscious that whole time? Yeah. Yeah, I could see what was happening. So what was happening on your end?

Just letting her do her thing. Just letting her be her so you're just in the back and walk yeah

It's kind of like I

saw this one picture online once where it was like somebody had drawn a face and

So you see like the side of the head. It's like a view from the side and

What you can like the eyes have like a projection as if you were looking like at a movie theater and somebody was sitting like

Watching what was happening through the eyes

So that's kind of what I'm doing. I'm almost like watching like as if I'm in a movie theater. Mmm

When Minnie says that you're like her mother. Mm-hmm. How does that make you feel?

It was fine at first actually it was a way for me to kind of relate to her and that's kind of what we've

Gone with you know, she calls me Mommy and that's fine. Um, I mean, I feel like

She's my little girl in a way. Like I have to protect this little being that's inside, you know, so in a way it's fine

what do you say to the people who watch this and say oh, she's just acting I

Feel like believe what you want, that's fine like it's again, it's not gonna hurt me. I know what I experience every day. I

just I

Would tell people just keep an open mind. Mm-hmm that you know other people who have DID

It's it's possible

so

You know, it's it's a reason why a lot of people don't even come out about it

you know, I've been a part of different kinds of groups on like Facebook and stuff where

you know a wife has DID and she's like, I've never told my husband because I just can't trust that he would actually like

Be there for me, you know. Mm-hmm. So

Just be supportive of the people that you love and if they come to you about anything

Keep an open mind was what just happened to rush

In like an adrenaline way not necessarily more of like a little bit of anxiety like oh this is happening, okay

Anxiety. Yeah, for Encina. Mm-hmm. Not for Minnie. Yeah just excitement for Minnie. Mm-hmm. Yeah, what did many think of me?

No, she was fine with you. She's

Fine with most people when she comes out. She just wants people to like her. Mm-hmm

What did she think of all she liked it? She was fine

Why do you think she changed her mind?

I

think it was because we've done videos in the past and it's something that she got excited to do because you know

We would come up with like scripts for it and stuff

and

She got to play it wasn't her her way of playing and getting to be you know, with the adults and stuff

so, I mean I've taken her to like the park and she's tried playing with like little kids and

Little kids are more understanding about it. You know, they're like, oh how old are you because she's

Walking and talking like a kid. Mm-hmm. And she says three years old and they're like, oh you're a big three-year-old

They believe it, you know, but obviously the parents are gonna be like get this nutjob away from my kids, you know

So it's it's a little rough. It's it's sad because she wants friends. What is good when you have friends

um

She I mean she got to play with these kids

You know, she had her toys and she brought her toys to the park, too

and then the parents said I mean the parents kind of like looked a little bit and I

was with one of my friends who kind of talked to I'm sorry who talked to the parent and

She seemed actually kind of understanding like she wasn't like oh this is weird like I gotta get my kids away or anything but

She's a three-year-old that can't have her own friends. Other than like the adults that are around already

It's so interesting to hear you talk about her like she is another person who's sitting here

I understand you're saying that they are people. Mm-hmm

But to me, I'm like no, this is just Encina when she's acting like a three-year-old. That's how it comes off. Yeah

where

We know that this is actually a separate

Human being. Mm-hmm

Wow, that just blew my mind

I've never seen anything before like that

okay, I mean it's

It's hard to grasp it's hard to grasp just sitting here watching it. Yeah, I wasn't prepared. I didn't prepare too interview a three-year-old

Yeah, I was just sitting here going

Well, of course

I would love to meet any alters that could come

But then I was I kind of just didn't know what to talk to her about. It was a

She's three years old. Yeah

But it's also a grown woman

Infront of me mhm. Oh, yeah. I I mean I get it

I've I've met people with DID where it's

hard for me to grasp because they have their own worlds and their own minds and their own personalities and some of them are

Like

wolves or

Like different like creatures and stuff that are mythological and stuff and for me, I'm like, oh, okay

How do I act in front of this other being or creature like yeah this wolf. Yeah

Well, I'm just sitting across from an adult. Yeah, yeah

Well, well, thank you for being so vulnerable of course and bringing Minnie out. I'm sure she's gonna be the star of YouTube

She'll appreciate that

Thank you for doing now of course the course

What?

Do you wish everyone knew about people with DID? I

wish think like

understood the

there

They're not just an alter. It's not just an alter ego. It's not something that we made up. You know, these are other

actual people hmm with their own lives

mmm, their own likes dislikes their their own taste in music their own like

Personalities in general they they all look different. They just share one body

hmm

so it's

I wish I could

explain to everybody how

these people aren't dangerous people with DID are

Usually the people to have stuff happen to them. They're not the ones that are gonna turn into like psycho killers. Mm-hmm

That's a good point

There's something traumatic has happened when they were young. Mm-hmm and

Now they have DID as the consequence of that. Mm-hmm, but now are being

Victimized in a certain way because of a stigma attached. Yeah, and they were the ones who originally attacked. Mm-hmm

Have you met anyone else with DID? I have I have and

It's been it was comforting it was really really comforting knowing that

there's others out there that are comfortable enough to

Like come out of their shell and say I have this - mm-hmm and not like keep it locked away

just the the more that people can hear about it and know that it's real, you know that there is hope you know, it's it's

It can only get better from here. Mm-hmm, you know there there can only be

More resources from here. Mm-hmm. So the more that that kind of stuff can

happen and

Come upon people. I think that's gonna be the best thing that happens. I think you're very brave for doing this

But I think you're going to help so many people who not only might be struggling with the idea

themselves but maybe know somebody who is

and I think all of us doing our part to be educated on the things that we know very little about

Is the first step on that?

And seeing a thank you for talking to MedCircle today

Thanks for watching

Your next step is to head on over to med circle dot-com and sign up for the med circle digest. What is it?

Well med circle will send you the latest articles and the latest videos on the mental health topics that matter most to you

So go to med circle comm sign up for that digest and let's keep this journey on better mental health moving forward

You


said that when you're in work you worry

a lot about how you come across in

social situations yet really makes me

feel really anxious like what I look

like and what people are thinking yeah

you said that you worried that you and

visibly shake yeah

and are there any other things that you

worry that people will notice I think

obviously the shaking I think my hands

and legs shaking and kind of going

really red and sweating and just looking

really weird so it sounds like you have

quite a strong mental image of how you

see yourself when you're in these social

situations yeah you so you go red you

shake so anything else that you think

that you do I mean describe yourself how

do you think you look when you're in

these situations just like I think I

just look really obviously weird and out

of place and like really red and just

visibly shaking and sweating and kind of

not being able to communicate properly

with people and is there anything that

you do to try and kind of defend against

these things to manage and these

problems and I guess like when I'm

holding the camera I just grip onto it

really really tight and or I kind of

clench all my muscles and just find

something that I can focus on and to

kind of try and make myself shake less

and not it was red and stuff mm-hmm

so you focus on something you grip onto

the camera do you make eye contact with

people no I just tend to just look down

okay so you also avoid eye contact is

there anything else that you do to

manage the sweating for example I just

as I said of looking down and like

wearing all black so it's less obvious

and kind of worrying yeah just more

layers and all blacks is you just can't

tell mm-hmm okay what'd you think would

happen if you stopped doing these things

if you stopped gripping onto the camera

or you know you started making eye

contact and not looking down and what do

you think would happen I think it would

be so much worse so yeah I think I just

would just shake even more and be more

anxious and look up more obviously kind

of weird and out of place mm-hmm I'm

what I'm thinking now is how would you

feel about if we did an experiment to to

test out your thoughts on what would

happen if you stopped doing these things

if we did a bit of a roleplay where we

pretended to enact a situation at work

okay and if we did this maybe twice and

the first time you do all the things

that you normally do okay and grip onto

something look down and is there

anything else that you do when you're in

these situations these were

conversations to try and cope and I just

kind of all just like fumble and like

kind of just clenched whatever whatever

it is I'm holding just really tight and

just make sure I don't make any eye

contact all right that's all just kind

of get through it okay so in the first

time I want you to do those things as

much as you normally would in fact maybe

even slightly more than you normally

would

okay and then the second time I want you

to drop doing those things all together

okay is that sound okay try my best and

and do how would you feel about if we

filmed this so you could actually see

what you looked like okay do you have a

camera with you that we could video on

yeah and Matt is my friend okay yeah

yeah we'll use that in just a sec okay

before we do this then we're just going

to fill out this form it's sir because

what we're doing now is an experiment we

call it a behavioral experiment to see

what happens when you change the way

that you're behaving okay so the first

column says I need to fill out an

experiment test this thought that you

have so that our experiment is going to

be that we do a conversation at work and

who should I play if you're playing

yourself in this role play who should I

be and maybe like a client at work I

always have to sit down with clients

before we do the shoe and kind of get to

know a little bit more about what they

want okay so would it work if I was

maybe having a wedding and I was hiring

yeah wedding photographer yeah what kind

of problems do you see coming up in this

conversation that we have like what we

see yourself doing on camera

I'm shaking like being really obviously

shaking and okay bright red and okay so

visibly shaking so how how much will you

be shaking 400 is like shaking

uncontrollably and zero is not shaking

at all how physically shaking will you

be 90 okay and but sorry what was the

other thing that you just said and okay

go really red okay so I'm gonna go red

yeah and how red will you go I mean if

we look around this room and probably

like the chairs okay thanks hello yeah

you're going to be as kind of brightly

pink as these chairs are yeah okay

so out of a hundred then how how pink

would you say these chairs are ninety

how hundred okay and what else you

worried is going to happen when we have

these conversations just worried I'll be

safe like say something stupid and not

be able to kind of get what I'm trying

to say across properly okay and how

stupid out of 100 if 100 is ridiculously

stupid probably like similar 90 and

created say and what I'll see you

worried will happen when you have this

conversation where else it might you see

on the camera I think you'll probably be

able to see the under it sweating and

okay and how much will you be sweating

and again 90 I think like weird like

visibly sweating down the face oh yeah

okay and what you think will happen the

second time around when you stop kind of

doing the things you normally do to cope

when you maybe start to make eye contact

and you're not gripping on something I

think it'll be even worse nothing cool

yeah

how much worse slightly worse like twice

as bad twice as bad okay yeah okay right

if you can you give me a fine animal

yeah

okay should I just use this and yeah

yeah it's probably best okay hmm okay hi

so um I was just wondering if I could

talk to you about maybe doing my wedding

photography yeah Oh what kind of kind of

what kind of things you see and how do

you want it to be like I suppose I'd

like lots of shots of our family and our

friends quite a lot of natural shots you

know people talking when they're having

drinks oh yeah

and you want it like do you kind of see

it being outside is that something that

you're interested in yeah shots it's

going to be a summer wedding so we like

like like a lot of outdoors shots and if

possible you know if it's not raining

that would be quite nice and yeah quite

some arty ones if that's possible yeah

and yeah that would be I've done quite a

few things like that before so have you

got anything that you could show me

about your past work yeah I recently did

them some sheets outside kind of in like

a wood environment so that I could show

you that maybe it would kind of help

with some ideas okay great

right let's do the second one now okay

okay you're ready to put down the bottle

and I take Mike I contact okay

okay hi so I just worry if I could speak

to you about doing my wedding

photography yeah yeah and what kind of

thing are you looking at how do you want

it to be like and I'd like kind of lots

of shots of family and friends and quite

a lot of natural shots you know okay um

are you interested in having things

outside maybe and he said it was wanted

it to be natural yeah it's going to be a

summer wedding and okay you know whether

dependent of course yeah it would be

really great if we could kind of get

lots of shots you know outdoors okay if

yeah people chatting and maybe some

quite arty ones as well yeah have you

got anything that you could show me up

your past work yeah actually it's kind

of a lot of the things I do are outside

and I'm really interested in getting

natural shots so and I could show you

some of my work and we could kind of see

if we could kind of develop something

from that could be quite good okay let's

pause it there okay Ryan's gonna give

you this back now to look at okay I know

I just want you to watch that okay and

then we'll chat about it in a moment

okay it's weird think if so if we just

go back to the things that you predicted

then you said that you thought you were

going to shake visibly shaked you see

yourself shaking on a video and

definitely not as much as I thought I

think it's obvious that I'm obviously

quite anxious but I don't think you can

tell I'm shaking that much mm-hmm so you

said that you were going to shake 90 out

of 100

how much shaking would you say that you

saw there and maybe like less than

thirty okay and you said that you were

going to go red or pink as pink as these

chairs 90 out of 100

did you notice yourself going pink and

not really actually definitely less than

I thought and yeah not as much okay you

said that you were worried that you were

going to say something stupid you know

at 90 out of 100

did you know yourself say anything

stupid not really

yeah yeah I was going to be a lot worse

than actually it was so you thought

you're going to be like 90 say something

that was 90 percent stupid that's really

quite strong I mean in the end did you

pick up anything that so could we maybe

put that as a cou maybe like less than

10 maybe here and you said that you

thought you're going to be sweating yeah

and that you're going to be visibly

sweating did you did you notice yourself

sweating in the end not really

definitely not as bad as I thought again

you thought you were going to be like 90

up and you're like seriously visibly

sweating so what what school would you

actually give it in the end

maybe again less than 10 I don't think

you could tell at all mm-hmm you also

said that you thought it was going to be

twice as bad when you stopped using your

normal strategies yeah what did you

notice watching that video it was

actually probably better when I wasn't

doing any of those things I think I

looked a lot more natural and I was able

to say what I was trying to say I think

I just come across more personable when

I'm not kind of looking down and stuff


said that when you're in work you worry

a lot about how you come across in

social situations yet really makes me

feel really anxious like what I look

like and what people are thinking yeah

you said that you worried that you and

visibly shake yeah

and are there any other things that you

worry that people will notice I think

obviously the shaking I think my hands

and legs shaking and kind of going

really red and sweating and just looking

really weird so it sounds like you have

quite a strong mental image of how you

see yourself when you're in these social

situations yeah you so you go red you

shake so anything else that you think

that you do I mean describe yourself how

do you think you look when you're in

these situations just like I think I

just look really obviously weird and out

of place and like really red and just

visibly shaking and sweating and kind of

not being able to communicate properly

with people and is there anything that

you do to try and kind of defend against

these things to manage and these

problems and I guess like when I'm

holding the camera I just grip onto it

really really tight and or I kind of

clench all my muscles and just find

something that I can focus on and to

kind of try and make myself shake less

and not it was red and stuff mm-hmm

so you focus on something you grip onto

the camera do you make eye contact with

people no I just tend to just look down

okay so you also avoid eye contact is

there anything else that you do to

manage the sweating for example I just

as I said of looking down and like

wearing all black so it's less obvious

and kind of worrying yeah just more

layers and all blacks is you just can't

tell mm-hmm okay what'd you think would

happen if you stopped doing these things

if you stopped gripping onto the camera

or you know you started making eye

contact and not looking down and what do

you think would happen I think it would

be so much worse so yeah I think I just

would just shake even more and be more

anxious and look up more obviously kind

of weird and out of place mm-hmm I'm

what I'm thinking now is how would you

feel about if we did an experiment to to

test out your thoughts on what would

happen if you stopped doing these things

if we did a bit of a roleplay where we

pretended to enact a situation at work

okay and if we did this maybe twice and

the first time you do all the things

that you normally do okay and grip onto

something look down and is there

anything else that you do when you're in

these situations these were

conversations to try and cope and I just

kind of all just like fumble and like

kind of just clenched whatever whatever

it is I'm holding just really tight and

just make sure I don't make any eye

contact all right that's all just kind

of get through it okay so in the first

time I want you to do those things as

much as you normally would in fact maybe

even slightly more than you normally

would

okay and then the second time I want you

to drop doing those things all together

okay is that sound okay try my best and

and do how would you feel about if we

filmed this so you could actually see

what you looked like okay do you have a

camera with you that we could video on

yeah and Matt is my friend okay yeah

yeah we'll use that in just a sec okay

before we do this then we're just going

to fill out this form it's sir because

what we're doing now is an experiment we

call it a behavioral experiment to see

what happens when you change the way

that you're behaving okay so the first

column says I need to fill out an

experiment test this thought that you

have so that our experiment is going to

be that we do a conversation at work and

who should I play if you're playing

yourself in this role play who should I

be and maybe like a client at work I

always have to sit down with clients

before we do the shoe and kind of get to

know a little bit more about what they

want okay so would it work if I was

maybe having a wedding and I was hiring

yeah wedding photographer yeah what kind

of problems do you see coming up in this

conversation that we have like what we

see yourself doing on camera

I'm shaking like being really obviously

shaking and okay bright red and okay so

visibly shaking so how how much will you

be shaking 400 is like shaking

uncontrollably and zero is not shaking

at all how physically shaking will you

be 90 okay and but sorry what was the

other thing that you just said and okay

go really red okay so I'm gonna go red

yeah and how red will you go I mean if

we look around this room and probably

like the chairs okay thanks hello yeah

you're going to be as kind of brightly

pink as these chairs are yeah okay

so out of a hundred then how how pink

would you say these chairs are ninety

how hundred okay and what else you

worried is going to happen when we have

these conversations just worried I'll be

safe like say something stupid and not

be able to kind of get what I'm trying

to say across properly okay and how

stupid out of 100 if 100 is ridiculously

stupid probably like similar 90 and

created say and what I'll see you

worried will happen when you have this

conversation where else it might you see

on the camera I think you'll probably be

able to see the under it sweating and

okay and how much will you be sweating

and again 90 I think like weird like

visibly sweating down the face oh yeah

okay and what you think will happen the

second time around when you stop kind of

doing the things you normally do to cope

when you maybe start to make eye contact

and you're not gripping on something I

think it'll be even worse nothing cool

yeah

how much worse slightly worse like twice

as bad twice as bad okay yeah okay right

if you can you give me a fine animal

yeah

okay should I just use this and yeah

yeah it's probably best okay hmm okay hi

so um I was just wondering if I could

talk to you about maybe doing my wedding

photography yeah Oh what kind of kind of

what kind of things you see and how do

you want it to be like I suppose I'd

like lots of shots of our family and our

friends quite a lot of natural shots you

know people talking when they're having

drinks oh yeah

and you want it like do you kind of see

it being outside is that something that

you're interested in yeah shots it's

going to be a summer wedding so we like

like like a lot of outdoors shots and if

possible you know if it's not raining

that would be quite nice and yeah quite

some arty ones if that's possible yeah

and yeah that would be I've done quite a

few things like that before so have you

got anything that you could show me

about your past work yeah I recently did

them some sheets outside kind of in like

a wood environment so that I could show

you that maybe it would kind of help

with some ideas okay great

right let's do the second one now okay

okay you're ready to put down the bottle

and I take Mike I contact okay

okay hi so I just worry if I could speak

to you about doing my wedding

photography yeah yeah and what kind of

thing are you looking at how do you want

it to be like and I'd like kind of lots

of shots of family and friends and quite

a lot of natural shots you know okay um

are you interested in having things

outside maybe and he said it was wanted

it to be natural yeah it's going to be a

summer wedding and okay you know whether

dependent of course yeah it would be

really great if we could kind of get

lots of shots you know outdoors okay if

yeah people chatting and maybe some

quite arty ones as well yeah have you

got anything that you could show me up

your past work yeah actually it's kind

of a lot of the things I do are outside

and I'm really interested in getting

natural shots so and I could show you

some of my work and we could kind of see

if we could kind of develop something

from that could be quite good okay let's

pause it there okay Ryan's gonna give

you this back now to look at okay I know

I just want you to watch that okay and

then we'll chat about it in a moment

okay it's weird think if so if we just

go back to the things that you predicted

then you said that you thought you were

going to shake visibly shaked you see

yourself shaking on a video and

definitely not as much as I thought I

think it's obvious that I'm obviously

quite anxious but I don't think you can

tell I'm shaking that much mm-hmm so you

said that you were going to shake 90 out

of 100

how much shaking would you say that you

saw there and maybe like less than

thirty okay and you said that you were

going to go red or pink as pink as these

chairs 90 out of 100

did you notice yourself going pink and

not really actually definitely less than

I thought and yeah not as much okay you

said that you were worried that you were

going to say something stupid you know

at 90 out of 100

did you know yourself say anything

stupid not really

yeah yeah I was going to be a lot worse

than actually it was so you thought

you're going to be like 90 say something

that was 90 percent stupid that's really

quite strong I mean in the end did you

pick up anything that so could we maybe

put that as a cou maybe like less than

10 maybe here and you said that you

thought you're going to be sweating yeah

and that you're going to be visibly

sweating did you did you notice yourself

sweating in the end not really

definitely not as bad as I thought again

you thought you were going to be like 90

up and you're like seriously visibly

sweating so what what school would you

actually give it in the end

maybe again less than 10 I don't think

you could tell at all mm-hmm you also

said that you thought it was going to be

twice as bad when you stopped using your

normal strategies yeah what did you

notice watching that video it was

actually probably better when I wasn't

doing any of those things I think I

looked a lot more natural and I was able

to say what I was trying to say I think

I just come across more personable when

I'm not kind of looking down and stuff


[Music]

we've talked with dr romney about

narcissism before but we've never gone

this in depth welcome to the med circle

series narcissistic personality disorder

the second hand smoke of mental health

you were one of

the first people to ever come on med

circle

you have made such a huge impact i'm so

glad yeah millions of people are getting

lots of emails i'm so happy because it's

helping people understand this and sort

of remove some of the responsibility

from themselves and and come up with a

realistic game plan which is so

important that's why i'm in this i'm

going to help people almost like help

people save themselves and move into a

far more bright future yes yeah we did

one video on this topic i don't even

know how long it was like 10 minutes

something like that and now we're

dedicating an entire series to the i

think it's good because i think that's

going to help a lot of people have a lot

of questions and i'm hoping we'll be

able to dispel some of that yeah and

create some more understanding before i

sat down with you the first time i did

not know that narcissism

was a personality disorder

narcissism is actually not a personality

see and that's already one of the big

misconceptions out there and why people

get their sort of themselves all up in a

froth is narcissism is a pattern

i don't know that i call it a trait as

much as a collection of patterns or

traits

narcissistic personality disorder

is a disorder and if you look at

existing and epidemiological studies

one to three percent maybe mostly

because these folks don't get into

treatment because they don't think

there's anything wrong with them right

so it's very difficult to get meaningful

statistics on what the true rates of

narcissistic personality disorder in the

population

narcissism whole other game much more

endemic it's a pattern people say well

that don't label people i'm like that's

no different than saying he's agreeable

he's sweet he's funny he's narcissistic

they're patterns

the first video we did on narcissism

millions and millions of views still

even growing at the time of filming this

every day

why is this topic resonating with so

many people it's the topic of our time

there's no two ways about it it's the

topic of our time it's misunderstood and

it is absolutely

destroying people

the fact is because people don't

understand it they don't understand that

they're even in it it's almost like

you're it's like having an illness and

you don't know why you're getting more

and more tired every week and then you

finally go see a doctor and the doctor's

like oh you have da da or you're being

exposed to duda and they're like thank

you for the explanation

the number of people i have worked with

who said to me had i not come and

consulted with you clinically and

understood what this pattern was i would

have stayed living like this forever and

probably ended up in an early grave i

mean this is i think when you say that

not because they have narcissists no but

because they're living in somebody so

it's the issue of our time and here's

where it gets tricky we've actually

and we've

rewarded it in our society we're saying

like behave badly

treat people badly throw people under

the bus let's reward you behave in a way

that's uncivil and unkind and be mean

and we'll give you your own tv show

so that's what's happening you said

something to me and i don't remember if

it was on or off camera but you said

the book on

narcissism

could be titled how to be a man in

today's world and succeed yeah

absolutely and it would be the same

exactly it would be the same it would

take a rule book i actually had a

student once come to me after class and

say you know i'm trying to succeed in

business and after learning about

narcissism i now realize that if i

do all these things i'll be really good

at sales can you teach me i was like no

wait teach him how to be a narcissist

yeah i know that no okay but just for

fun can you teach someone how to play

not really i'll be frank with you i'd be

doing a lot better financially faster a

bit more narcissistic in fact and

they'll make so much money oh they do

the research is actually quite clear

a trick called agreeableness which is

actually quite opposite to narcissism

people who are agreeable are friendly

warm open gregarious helpful to other

people they make significantly less

income than people who are more

antagonistic and narcissistic yeah i

mean it costs you think about it you

know like oh no that's okay you don't

need to pay me for that

you know that kind of thing

you're like the doctor who takes your

payment in pies rather than money you

know it's like that kind of just a nice

thank you we'll do i will take a cherry

pie from time to time

you're not a narcissist uh what

can you still though

be strict and successful and aggressive

and

and make a ton of money and all these

things without being a narcissist

i'm not sure

even that answer is a really

strong answer you're not yeah i'm not

sure i haven't seen much evidence of it

i've seen some people really really make

it but even they'll acknowledge

i had to play a little bit of hardball i

had to put my needs way ahead of someone

else and not stop to think how this may

hurt them i mean there was definitely a

relative empathy deficit compared to

a far more agreeable person i just don't

say business by and large is a zero-sum

game yes and i think when you're working

in a corporate structure and you're

having to answer to folks like

shareholders and there's they don't care

about sort of the rank and file employee

that that's when the game changed i

still think when you had company towns

and the guy who ran the factory still

knew of the lives of the others there

was a bit more empathy that's kind of

gone you throw in other societal trends

like social media where it's all about

you know who can sort of social

comparison who can look better that kind

of thing it becomes more superficial i

think all of that is colluding that we

don't value empathy anymore we really in

fact especially in boys and men we're

not teaching our boys to be empathic

we're actually saying empathy is a

weakness in boys and men and that's

really one place where we can really see

a correction if we could do that but

we're actually going in the opposite

direction i mean empathy has really kind

of gone the way of the eight track like

not cool not hip

you said one to three percent of the

population has been diagnosed with

nurses yeah that's what the research

studies show and you know what i think

we get caught up in like people say it's

my boyfriend it's my husband it's my

wife when you really open that net to

mothers and fathers brothers and sisters

bosses and co-workers aunts uncles you

name it you'll see i actually don't know

a single human being whose life hasn't

really been touched by pathological

narcissism what's interesting is that

for some people it comes late in life so

they had great parents nice husband good

friends but then their sister marries a

narcissist and that's actually worse

like when your first encounter of it is

when you're a full-blown adult because

then you really don't know what to do

it's like trying to learn to speak

french when you're 50. like good luck

with that yeah you know so whereas

others of us who've started early in

this training in fact in this new book

i'm writing i say who was your first

narcissist for some people was mom like

you met her on day one for some folks

versus narcissistic because there's

going to be he's always the first wow

for people who don't know who you are

why should they listen to you when it

comes to narcissism you know

they should listen to me because

actually my way of coming into this area

was through multiple pathways the

research in my lab at california state

university of los angeles we focused on

personality disorders there and

narcissism was the one pattern where we

saw it but wasn't behaving in a

consistent manner but at the same time

in my private practice

i was astounded at the number of people

who were coming in and literally saying

the same thing and i'm like okay there's

something going on here and i really did

dug into it and said these these

partners of them they're all

narcissistic people these people are so

frustrated they keep trying everything

their partners don't change they get up

every day thinking and hoping it'll be

different it's not it's devastating and

so then i did research into i'm like wow

this is really not very treatable than

our the the person with narcissistic

personality disorder and even the

pattern really wasn't that changeable

and that just set me into a deep kind of

deep dive into the literature i

interviewed people all over the country

in fact all over the world about their

experiences with narcissistic husbands

wives boyfriends girlfriends and then

that culminated in my second book which

is called should i stay or should i go

surviving a relationship with a

narcissist and and then it was kind of

off to the races from then i think some

things changed in our world and

narcissism became more and more and more

of a topic and i'm surprised at how many

smart people just don't get it and and

it's such a pattern i said you should

almost be reassured a lot of people say

narcissists are unpredictable i said

unpredictable they're the most

predictable person in the room we know

exactly what they'll do and they say

jekyll hyde i said jekyll hyde is kind

of predictable you know they're going to

be mean and then they're going to be

nice so that's the you know once you get

that pattern into place and you know and

you know what you're dealing with i

think our problem is we it's all about

second chances that we give them we're a

little bit too heavy-handed with the

forgiveness and i'm hoping we can sort

of help folks work navigate those waters

in a way that's healthy for them and

their families so we know what people

who are in a relationship with a

narcissist or know a narcissist will get

from this series oh yeah it's the hope

it's the education it's actionable steps

if there is a narcissist out there who

stumbles upon this video because

everybody in their life has told them

you're a narcissist and they have even a

little bit of self-awareness maybe i am

what do you think they will gain out of

this this has become the question of the

year because i get emails almost every

day from a person some of them are angry

some of them are downright threatening

and some of them are really contrite

where they're saying i'm this person and

i don't want to be this person anymore

and i've hurt people give me that person

and we might have a little hope now

here's the rub a person let's say a

lifelong narcissist they're 30 40 50

years old this is how they've always

treated people

it's a tough fix it's almost like trying

to take someone who's really sweet and

making them mean not easy to do it's the

same thing we're just trying to flip it

out in the other direction take a

narcissist and turn them into someone

who's more self-aware and kind what you

might see is that you might get some

small fixes from them but i do think it

all is not lost i think if somebody is

narcissistic and is willing to do the

hard yards and put their head down

commit with a good therapist really

commit to mindfulness every day you

might get someone that way you might get

enough of a change where their family

notices a difference they may become a

somewhat better parent they might become

a somewhat better partner i mean i think

are you ever going to make them the

sweet agreeable teddy bear probably not

i think what i see is when narcissists

do enter treatment and become self-aware

the thing that they become self-aware of

and this is where it gets painful is the

emptiness and how insecure they really

are and that is one really tough look in

the mirror that's what they're avoiding

all along that's why they're so

grandiose i don't want to see the

emptiness so when we strip away that

veil and i've worked with many clients

where we finally got to the core of the

insecurity they actually became down

like downright depressed wow and that's

what they were trying to avoid all along

so it's a it's a very complex nuanced

long-term treatment plan but listen if

you're self-aware and you're like i want

to turn this around

i think that commitment is most of the

variance that's where it's at i think

something can be done just a slow burn

dr romini describes narcissism as the

second hand smoke of mental health but

why and why is narcissism more dangerous

than just being self-confident what

exactly narcissistic personality

disorder is what is it okay all people

with narcissistic personality disorder

are obviously narcissistic okay not all

people are narcissistic may have

narcissistic personality disorder so

it's a fine point but it's an important

point since everybody's throwing this

word around these days right you know

it's not unlike other diagnoses that

have

different meaning to them this one's

sort of this is like a character

assassination right so when we talk

about narcissistic personality disorder

there's a long list of patterns and they

have to have five of the nine on that

list it has to be something we call

pervasive meaning it cuts across

situations with a variety of people in

at work at home it's not just like

they're narcissistic to only you and

they're nice to everyone in the world

tends to be pervasive but here's the rub

it has to involve what we call

social and occupational impairment and

subjective distress that's a fancy way

of saying it is messing up that person's

life they're aware it's messing up their

life and they're uncomfortable with it

and that's where you don't see as many

people with narcissistic personality

disorder so if their style of not having

empathy of being entitled of being

grandiose of being arrogant and

superficial and all that is working out

for them they're not going to walk

around saying i'm having a problem

they're not going to walk around saying

this is causing me problems so if they

don't acknowledge that piece of it then

really they're a narcissist which is

sort of a clinical term for being a jerk

and we don't get to diagnose people for

being a jerk we may not like them but

that's not a condition we diagnose we

diagnose people because they're bringing

in something that they're uncomfortable

with or that's causing them problems the

best example i can give you is let's say

somebody's been using drugs for two

years and their drug use results in duis

and other problems in their lives okay

when that happens they may themselves

say i don't have a problem with drugs

but i do have five dui's and they did

find me in the gutter and from my mom's

house so i guess mom maybe there's a

problem in narcissism

they may

they may recognize that yeah sure i got

in trouble at work and i was called out

on this and that problem and i did cheat

on my wife several times but it's

working out for me is that distressing

this is being a jerk so dr alan francis

dr francis is actually one of the

architects of this diagnosis originally

in the dsm and he he himself has come

out very clearly and said we don't get

to diagnose somebody because we don't

like them

that's not what this diagnosis is for

it's for somebody who's actually having

discomfort and distress because they're

behaving in this narcissistic manner

it's a fine point but it's an important

point and here at med circle i really

want to be careful as we use these two

terms because i think a lot of the

listeners don't know if their friend

family member or boss has the diagnosis

and may never find out unless that

person that other person gets into

treatment

and their friend family member boss

might just be a jerk there might be a

jerk and they may say why should i go

get a diagnosis there's nothing wrong

with me and if they're walking around

saying there's nothing wrong with me and

i'm fine then according to the dsm

they're not they're not

they're not an art they don't have mpd

no that's it and so and that's where

people get upset i get emails every day

will you talk to my husband and tell him

he has narcissistic personalities for

i'm like no

please do not please i would love to do

that no win there so that's a lot of the

struggle here is that and you know what

the pattern of narcissism it's awful

they may be fine with it but you as the

recipient of that pattern it's not it's

you you're going to struggle with it

it's uncomfortable it's one of those

patterns that's really unhealthy for the

people around it i call it the

second-hand smoke of psychiatry like

being near a person who's narcissistic

it's as unhealthy as doing it yourself

whoa

that is a great metaphor

npd is the second hand smoke of

psychiatry and i'd say narcissism is the

second hand smoke of our time of our

time you stand close enough to it you're

gonna get sick even that's a huge deal

for people because

somebody might not get the diagnosis

yeah but there's still have all these

toxic behaviors that are affecting oh

absolutely and you know what in some

ways the diagnosis is irrelevant because

all is all that's doing is saying the

person's having problems because of it

but if they're

lying manipulating exploiting

raging at you who cares if they have a

diagnosis that's not good for you to be

in the presence of and then it takes us

back to that more critical issues why

are people like this or like this

because they're insecure and that makes

people feel guilty well

if he's insecure and this is why he's

doing this and that's what we're gonna

have to get to the core of

when does normal

self-confidence cross the line into

grandiosity

self-confidence is a healthy

state and people who are self-confident

don't need to blast their achievements

from every rooftop and every social

media platform people who are truly

self-confident don't need to talk over

other people and their achievement

people who are self-confident don't

require their achievements to be front

and center and ahead of everybody else's

people who are self-confident are so

confident in their sense of self and

their achievements that they actually

can stay quiet about it

in another video in this series we'll

talk about the different types of nurse

npd yeah but i'll give everyone a

preview from the original video we did

the communal narcissist the communal

narcissist when you said it's that

person who goes and volunteers on a

saturday but takes selfies the whole

time and a full perfect face of makeup i

go oh

i so know that person you know and it's

also the person who you say like let's

throw a gala and you're like but the gal

is going to cost 10 000 and you're only

going to make 500 for the charity why

not just write the full 10 000 for the

the charity like but i need the gala

they need gallows they need catalyst

they need parties they need celebrations

and you know what i'm smiling when you

say that because uh i think smiling is

one of my coping mechanisms by the way

like laughter and smiling because these

are very deep and heavy topics and

they're

affecting a lot of the everybody who's

in a relationship with a narcissist

which is almost everybody which is

almost everywhere and in a lot of cases

there are narcissists or in people with

mpd who

who are suffering

they well i think if you want to get

down to the core of it they are

suffering because they're deeply

insecure yeah and that's where you know

i mean but do they experience it as

suffering i'll tell you this like i said

with the people with npd or narcissism

where we start peeling back the layers

by the time you get down to layer 10 and

you start looking in the gaping hole

it's not comfortable for them and you do

it your heart does ache for them because

there's such there's almost a childlike

emptiness to them i'm not saying i'd

want to be in a relationship with them

though i can tell you that right now i

mean i can handle it for an hour at a

time but my god for a person who

actually has to live with that day in

and day out it's a nightmare are there

common co-occurring disorders

with people with mpd people who have

narcissistic personality disorder or

even narcissistic traits there are

several co-occurring patterns we can see

that are more likely to happen all forms

of substance use disorders you know a

lot of times it's to fill the emptiness

or to enhance the grandiosity so alcohol

use

cocaine use you know a stimulant use

that kind of thing so you'll see some of

that um depression

interestingly narcissism and depression

can hang out together a lot of it is

that insecurity and that emptiness it's

not unusual to see those two kind of

hanging out together but are they

getting diagnosed with depression

sometimes they're getting diagnosed with

depression because they might be very

irritable we'll see that in men

what will happen is

you'll sometimes confuse the two as well

because the type of narcissism we're

going to be talking about today is

called covert narcissism people who are

covert narcissists they're a little bit

like eeyore from winnie the pooh it's

like woe is me

no one understands me how come the world

is so unfair to me and they seem so

downtrodden that they look depressed and

then all of us will treat them as though

they're depressed and we're making

absolutely no headway and then one day

you your dawn's on you're like oh this

isn't depression at all so actually

quite frankly we'll often treat the

depress we'll think they're depressed

before we'll think they're but wrongly

so but wrongly so yeah again just

highlighting how important is to get the

right diagnosis it really is because

these personality patterns also make

treating other mental health conditions

for example it's not unusual for

narcissism to also be found coexisting

with bipolar disorder which is also a

very messy kind of uh issue to treat

because the grandiosity of the mania and

the grandiosity of the narcissism often

collides so you'll see that too and i

when i've worked with families of um

when they have adult children who are

substance abusers and the the adult

child goes into rehab

i'll also know that adult child has

narcissism and i'll i'll be i'll ache

for them because they're thinking their

child is going to go to rehab not only

come out sober but sweet they come out

sober but they're still as irritable

invalidating sort of mean as they always

were that part's not going to go away

that's the narcissism maybe even more so

even more so and you see this a lot in

substance abuse treatment circles that

you see a lot of it yes exactly because

the the substance use was sort of

helping them kind of shore up their

defenses and so it can make treatment

much much more complicated you'll also

see more a greater likelihood for

example like patterns that are sometimes

labeled love and sex addiction kinds of

like compulsive sexuality compulsive

like relationship patterns you'll see

that it coexisting with narcissism as

well it just makes everything that much

harder to treat

yes that's what it is because you don't

tend to get as much emotion there's a

lot more defensiveness i know more than

the doctor there is a lack of empathy

there's a lot of projection all this

stuff really makes it hard to do really

deep psychotherapy with somebody

how many different types of npd are

there well there's there's different

kinds of narcissism whether those

translate into subtypes of narcissistic

personality disorder i once said there's

nine possible symptoms of narcissistic

personality disorder which means there's

thousands and thousands of possible

combinations right but if we were really

to look at in five patterns that i've

sort of broken down in my book and this

is based on the theoretical work on

narcissism drawing from other people's

work when we talk about the types of

narcissism they're not really subtypes

of narcissistic personality disorder but

there are different kinds of patterns we

see of narcissism and i think it's

important to see the differences because

it shows us this doesn't look the same

across everyone and then some people say

well that's not narcissism the person i

know acts like this and i'll say ah but

it's a similar pattern let's get down to

the brass tacks of what all narcissists

look like in all narcissism we tend to

see a lack of empathy

grandiosity

entitlement superficiality

chronic seeking of validation outside of

them

uh arrogance and a real tendency towards

rage as well as a tendency to manipulate

or exploit other people those you tend

to see across the board

to varying degrees

so let's start at the top with what i

considered the most severe and

problematic narcissistic pattern and

that's the malignant or the toxic

narcissist

these are the folks that almost look

like psychopaths they are they'll

exploit other people they take advantage

of other people they lie they cheat they

they work the system to their advantage

they can often be quite successful

you might wonder why am i not calling

them psychopaths they can sometimes feel

remorse for what they're doing they're

like this isn't cool but i just got i

just got to get this part done and i'll

make it right whereas the psychopath

wouldn't need to make it right so

there's just a really manipulative

mean-spirited edge to them that can be

very unsettling but but when you first

meet them they're extraordinarily

charming extraordinarily charismatic

confident successful so that's sort of

your malignant toxic type you'll often

see these folks running big companies

you know

at the heads of government all of that

like they have they really not a working

system wow the next in the in the group

is what i call sort of your classical

grandiose narcissist and that's what

most of us think of the person who's

braggy who really is entitled i'm

special i deserve special treatment it's

almost like your celebrity narcissist

that's what your grandiose narcissist

they brag a lot they show off a lot look

at my new car look at my new this look

at my new girlfriend it's a lot of show

and tell they suck all the oxygen out of

the room all the usual traits but they

don't tend to be as exploitative and as

mean as the malignant narcissists but

they are sort of your classical

kind of narcissist the next narcissist

on the list and this is probably the

most mysterious one and maybe the most

revealing to med circle listeners is the

covert or vulnerable narcissist these

are the woe is me narcissists you know

if the world could see how great i am

i'd be one of the great ones but nobody

gets me because i'm ahead of my time and

so they'll you'll often find them sort

of at home huddled over their computer

being like a troll or like coming up

with their next big plan but they almost

have a failure to launch a lot of the

time they can often look depressed

there's a real they seem vulnerable

because they almost feel like the world

doesn't get them they're hyper

hypersensitive to criticism

um there but they lack empathy and they

can be very entitled like i deserve

special treatment because you know the

world doesn't know this but i'm the best

what's interesting about that is i

listen to that and i

when you would first meet somebody like

that you think oh they just have low

self-esteem yeah bingo but all

narcissists have low self-esteem right

that's why they're doing that exactly so

the covert narcissists they lead with

that but it looks like it's almost like

they they feel like they're they have

this sort of strange i always say that

the covert narcissist has this sort of

weird pause they'll say

yeah

i went to that college but i guess

nobody cares

and they'll do that weird thing you're

like okay well it's a little bit of

strange pause but it's a they're like

yeah i i already read that book but why

would you care

you know it's like one of those

wow

there's there's an edge it's almost like

you're sticking your hand into a bucket

of barbed wire it doesn't feel good it's

like even with those examples even

though they were just you know like yeah

random examples i still feel the pain

for that person oh they're they're they

feel the world pass them by yeah but i

don't feel the same way with a grandiose

narcissist as much

the covert narcissist ultimately will

get to the point where they feel the

world owes them something

the world owes me and there'll be a real

edge to them you know because they but

it is they seem really sad and you'll

often try to help them and you'll wonder

why they're so ungrateful

that's why that can feel really

uncomfortable for other people who are

so sympathetic to them and wonder why

are they not ever saying thank you or

recognizing all we did yeah now number

four is the communal narcissist the

communal narcissist can be very

confusing because they're out there

volunteering and flying all over the

world and doing their own personal

rescue missions and you know after every

hurricane they're posting online

hurricane goals hashtag hurricane goals

and like let's all raise enough money

and let's send lots of stuff down to the

hashtag they're the hashtag narcissist

but like it's all about their their

goals for helping the world and and like

you'll see them i mean you're not you

know about animal rescue people like

they're always holding their rescue dogs

but then they go home and they're really

mean to their husband yeah and they love

going to galas and they want buildings

named after them and if they do give a

donation they have to hold 20 gold

shovels and have lots of pictures taken

like it's all about the they do all

these things to get validation that's

their tool for getting validation are

often really unkind to the people that

their fa their immediate family or the

people who work under them they can be

absolutely awful to them and people say

oh my gosh you're so lucky you work with

him he's so charitable and the people

are just like oh no this is that's one

of many characteristics he is so so the

communal narcissist is a very it's a it

takes a while to sort of on to peel off

that layer and then to sort of that's

why i always say pay attention to how a

person treats the person who don't have

as much power as them in that situation

because that's going to teach you a lot

so they'll be really sweet to the

recipient of the charitable dollars but

really mean to the person who's working

with them and that doesn't add up the

last narcissist is sort of kind of a

good nature i'm going to call them the

benign narcissist the benign narcissist

is like this sort of clueless

uninsightful person who just says really

vapid things

very superficial

only cares like all i want is like a

fast car and you know you're driving a

piece of junk like they'll be like

dismissive other people that sounds like

every 16 year old i've ever met in many

ways if there's an adolescence there's

an immaturity but they really aren't

that mean-spirited and you can actually

kind of say that's not a nice thing to

say they're like well yeah i guess so

but then they'll go back and say it the

next day i always say it's nice to have

a few benign narcissists on deck because

they're fun to have at a party you know

like just keep them on that list but

never turn to them at a time of need

just because i'm curious and i get to

ask questions which

you know somebody put me in charge to do

this

who would you most want to be in a

relationship with those

those are your five oh mama you know and

and just solitude and the cabin isn't

because i'm gonna take if solitude in

the cabin is my option i'm going with

that one okay so it's not an option i

prefer i don't think any of those are

good

you have to choose one you have to

choose you have to choose one i might

choose the communal narcissist and

just be glad they're doing nice things

for other people

they're nice to me yeah but i i have to

tell you that can be exhausting because

when the whole world is saying you're so

lucky

he's so charitable like oh my gosh she

hasn't said something nice to me in 15

years

they're all painful maybe the benign one

but even that you feel like you're

forever in a relationship with your high

school boyfriend right that's not nice

right so i if you're if you're if like

if the cabin by myself for the rest of

my life is it's a possibility i'm going

communal i get it with therapy i can

have a cabin from you like two acres

away yeah and then we can just meet when

we want to hang out i don't recommend

any of these types for a relationship

well what about my idea for i'll have a

cabin one acre away from yours yeah that

will do that okay because you were

shaking your head no no no no no no no

you might be a narcissist so we have to

be that's true

after my before

if you don't know what we're talking

about go see the previous episode okay

uh out of those five types is there one

that's most common i would have to say

probably the grandiose the classical

narcissist okay yeah so that's why it's

classical because that's yeah

okay um

what am i not asking you about

narcissistic personality disorder as it

is defined from understanding it that i

need to be asking you know all the all

the patterns i gave you are what are

what you see of the nine characteristics

that a diagnostic manual like the dsm

would require what's really interesting

is that our diagnostic manuals are now

taking sort of a new direction in how we

think about these personality patterns

and in the most i mean not to make 2 2

kind of bookish a point on it but the

dsm now views narcissism and all of the

personality disorders through a new kind

of a lens and it looks at for example

how a person

views their own identity and the

narcissist identity is very much caught

up in how they're viewed by other people

so they don't have a core sense of self

their sense of self is governed entirely

by the world outside of them that's

actually a terrifying feeling like the

only way i'm good is if everyone tells

me i'm good today that's very unstable

we also look at goal setting how do they

how do they set their goals and

narcissists set their goal in a way

that will get them approval from the

world so either they set their goals

unrealistically high so they can talk

about the big goals they have which

they're never going to meet or they set

their goals a little too low so they

know they're always going to surpass

them

so but no matter what their goal setting

once again is based on how they can talk

to the world about these things

then when we look at other areas we look

at empathy and their lack thereof so now

dsm is looking at this across all

personality patterns and people with

narcissism don't have empathy they look

at people as existing to serve their

needs what can you do for me and then

i'll make a relationship with you so

that's why a lot of people say but that

narcissistic guy was really nice to me

i'm like yeah because he needed you as a

sales contact you're like oh or they

like the fact that you live in the right

neighborhood in town there's a need

being served and then finally

dsm is looking at narcissism through the

lens of intimacy and that's one thing

that narcissists are not good at they're

not good at intimacy they're not good at

close relationships by and large their

relationships are superficial and are

really engaged in for personal gain so

they might get a very attractive partner

because that makes them look good to the

world they might get a wealthy partner

because that will make sure they have

lots of money they might get a famous

partner so that they look good to the

world i mean the the the characteristics

on which they choose the partner are

deeply deeply superficial and so that's

how a narcissist chooses and so when we

look at those areas self uh goal setting

empathy and intimacy that's another way

to view narcissism no matter what it's

just really that it comes down to that

core insecurity that sense they cannot

regulate themselves from the inside out

that they don't have a good sense of

identity and that they're really reliant

on the world for telling them what

they're about which makes them actually

quite resentful a recent study suggests

that one in 16 americans has been

affected by someone with narcissistic

personality disorder so what causes npd

and can it be unlearned

what causes narcissism it's it's there's

actually a lot of pathways to this and

the city of oz that we call narcissism

there's a lot of ways you get there um a

lot of people the big question everyone

has is are you born this way or are you

made

it's mostly made

but there's a little bit of born

and what's the percentage on that i i

you know i i if i were to spit ball i'm

going to go with like an 80 20 or a 90

10 in terms of made versus born i mean

the inborn part is that because the fact

of the matter is we see people come from

invalidating early environments or

overindulged or spoiled in early

environments and they don't turn out

narcissistic so there's got to be

something else at play right and that's

probably where that temperamental piece

comes in kids are likely more

hyper-sensitive hyper-emotional

if you look at marsha linehan's work on

borderline personality disorder she

actually talks about that mix between

the biological vulnerability plus the

invalidation of the early environment

there's likely something like that

happening in narcissism too but it's

mostly made so let's let's view it as

almost concentric circles and let's

start at the middle circle which is

really what happens in the family when

the child is first growing up

children who are children who don't get

consistent emotional mirroring for the

from their parents that's a setup for

becoming a narcissist later on because

that's how children learn to regulate

their emotional worlds they learn how to

self-soothe their emotions they learn

how to take responsibility for their

emotions they learn how to understand

their emotions from how they're mirrored

by their parents and if their parents

have consistent appropriate reactions

and are available to them that's how the

child learns that so if a child for any

number of reasons doesn't have that kind

of consistent feedback from their

parents the parents are distracted the

parents are absent the parents don't

care the parents are addicted to drugs

and are not available in that way all of

those could be contributors to that

parents just are abusive in some way

obviously that can be a contributor too

to inconsistent kinds of mirroring and

then the child doesn't learn like i said

to sort of regulate their own emotion

they keep looking to the environment for

validation because frankly they're

confused we also think about narcissism

in the early environment as a function

of attachment children who have secure

healthy attachments tend to go on to

adulthood and make more secure healthy

attachments but kids who have more

anxious or avoidant attachments

that can set the tone for attachment

issues in adulthood and they're not able

to make those kinds of successful

attachments in adulthood so their

relationships are really fraught with

lots of in and out back and forth rather

than the consistency you'd see from a

secure attachment with a parent

the other thing i often say is that

parents who are nurses parents who

create narcissistic

kids who go on to become narcissistic

adults we see a pattern of simultaneous

over-indulgence

and under-indulgence and what i mean by

that is these are the kids where if they

do the sport their parent wants or get

the straight a's or the prima ballerina

dancer or whatever it is they do the

best violin player

whatever they want to take over dad's

business whatever the thing they say

they want to do if the parents can get a

good public face from it they will over

indulge the kid in that way they'll

drive them to every practice they'll go

out of their way but when that child has

an emotional need that needs to be met

the parents are nowhere to be found like

they're interested when their kids on

stage they're interested when their kids

on the field they're interested when the

child's getting an honor or doing what

they want them to do but when that kid

really needs their emotional needs to be

met it's it's completely an impoverished

environment that's what i mean by being

over and under-indulged

it's also what we call modeling it's

what they see in their environment if

they watch a parent constantly be

entitled they're going to learn to be

entitled if they watch a parent who has

no empathy they're not going to learn

empathy empathy is learned in childhood

you cannot teach a 30 year old how to be

empathic that's an early game so that

that was my question because if if you

were saying that 80 to 90

of becoming a narcissist was taught then

certainly later we could unteach it but

we'd like to think no because you know

what ends up happening is that

ultimately these these environments for

children are inconsistent

they're invalidating at the worst of it

they can be abusive and dehumanizing and

that's the heartbreak is that i've

worked with more than a few folks who

are adult narcissists who did come from

abusive invaliding down downright

definitely who have narcissistic

personality disorder narcissistic

personality disorder so their early

lives were really really sort of

wretched and that's heartbreaking but

that's still not

a

get out of jail free card for treating

other people badly like i'm not getting

i'm not down with that and so but now

let's take that now we're in the family

but we got to push this out a little bit

society is to blame too

we tell kids it's okay at some level to

behave as long as you win

you got into harvard junior great

whatever it took to get there as long as

we start saying that you can shelve

important qualities like compassion

kindness respect

mutuality empathy as long as you're

telling people it's okay to put that

stuff away as long as you succeed our

achievement-oriented culture is a

contributor to these patterns for sure

because we're almost saying empathy is a

waste of time as long as you get

straight a's

you know who needs kindness when you can

write code that's not going to fly you

know so that's the other reason we're

seeing more and more of this and then

you add things like social media and the

kinds of things society values into the

mix

then that's it i mean it's a perfect

storm that's what i'm saying we've got

you got the family you've got the

community you've got the culture at

large and then you have a little bit of

individual temperament thrown in there

forget about it when you hear

how narcissists narcissism is

conditioned i'm surprised that it's only

one to three percent of the population

that has it remember that's narcissistic

personality disorder which requires that

person to have had problems in their

life because of it awareness of it and

feel like it's caused them trouble yeah

because narcissism works as a pattern in

our society too often they don't feel a

lot of distress so when you were talking

about parents mirroring or kids marrying

their parents

there are certain behaviors that i grew

up with right and my parents that i

did until my mid-20s and then i thought

i'm not going to do this anymore this is

not healthy for me it's not nice i'm not

going to do it and so i changed so why

is it that i can change an undesirable

behavior but someone who has

narcissistic personality disorder can't

change because you've got because the

core conflict is that insecurity that

discomfort with themselves that sense of

emptiness that's what has to be

addressed so you may have seen that but

it clearly didn't result in that kind of

core insecurity perhaps in you so when

you were doing the yelling it's like

well this is how it's done and they're

like whoa maybe this other person feels

sad when i'm yelling at them this isn't

okay so you were able to have that

correction because a you were able to

engage in empathy and b you may not have

had that core insecurity remember the

narcissist is absolutely reliant on the

world for validation at all times when

we need someone we resent them

you know a child doesn't but the child

grows you think about an adolescent

every adolescent out there

um

resents their parents why do they resent

their parents because they kind of still

need them they kind of still need them

to be a mom but like i want you to be my

mom i don't want you to be my mom and

they go back and forth and then they

hate you

you know so it's that resentment comes

from need and it's one thing to be five

of course you need your parents that's

built in but when you're 35 45 and you

need people to tell you you're great all

the time you may not be aware of that

need but you are aware that you're

reliant on the world and that if you're

having a bad day that the only way to

spring out of it is to get validation

from the world that stinks

so that's why it's very difficult to

change it's not just about modeling

empathy and there there is an

interesting concept out there and it's

something actually even in my social

media someone that we've engaged on

about this idea of cognitive empathy you

can teach people like that's how he

feels okay got it do you understand why

that would be feel bad got it

that's almost intellectualized and it's

a little bit different than being in the

emotional mock with someone

is it like acting it's not it no it's

not acting it's knowing but it's not

getting

you see what i'm saying i know i know i

know

why

this person would feel upset right now i

know that yeah i might even get it a

little bit

but

i'm not feeling it so much so that it'll

stop my behavior in the future so it's

like a half of a fix and when you're

really in a close intimate relationship

some with someone and the best they can

come up with is like

i suppose i understand why you feel that

way

but they're still not like and they're

not emotionally there with you that's

incredibly unsatisfying it's kind of

like when somebody says well i'm sorry

if you feel that yes narcissist mantra

yeah i'm sorry you feel that that's not

an applause that's not that's not an

apology exactly you have been in a

relationship with a narcissist my myself

yes yes of course okay in different

areas too intimate relationships

familial relationships um

work relationships but just so all of

the mystical knows it's not my

ex-husband he's actually a great father

so

because i'm curious because if 80 to 90

percent is taught

were you hyper aware raising your kids

to not raise a narcissist my

the my ex-husband and i when we were

raising our kids

the one thing we 100 agreed upon he's

like romney we have a lot of things we

have to get right but we looked at each

other and said the one thing we must

make sure we focus on above all else

because we only get one chance to get

this right is empathy

we didn't care how they did in school

we didn't care if they didn't eat their

vegetables we didn't care if they

watched television 10 hours a day we

just needed them to be empathic and

there was a fine day when they were

about eight or nine years old oh my god

we got it

wait was your hold on i have so many

questions was your ex-husband uh a

mental health professional okay so you

have yeah it's not like these kids have

two yeah like

world-renowned mental health experts

parenting them and the two of you both

agreed that empathy was number one

empathy is everything this is huge for

parents to get huge because i'll tell

you it's the core of why kids bully

all the problems we have with kids it

has to be about empathy am i telling you

my kids have had the most smooth ride no

one's kids are i mean and they're

horribly mean to me because they're

teenagers but i will say that i can see

in their face when they go one line too

far as a teenager and they say that one

mean thing and they see my face change

immediately the empathy overtakes them

quicker than their words do their face

changes i've watched my daughters

interact with people and i'll watch how

quickly their face will change when they

sense another human being in need and at

those points i do heave that sigh of

relief whatever path they take i do know

that they're hyper aware of not

hyperware like in a neurotic way but

they're very aware of the the needs and

the feelings of other people and they

will shape their behavior in that way

and that was the only thing that

mattered because i wanted to put two

decent kind human beings into the world

that's really beautiful

i bet if i lined up a hundred parents

and asked them

if you could only

give your kid one thing what would it be

i don't think one of them would say

empathy that's terrible because i'll

tell you i would the world has enough

smart people and it turns out they do

well in school but if i had to choose if

somebody said you could give up your kid

getting into like a top college or

something and trade that out for empathy

i'd be like hell no

she could go i don't care what she does

but i would not let her give because

parents are concerned they're sharing

you know kindness being honest

diligent hard-working i've never heard

empathy yeah it's ever it was everything

the way i raised them in fact even how i

breastfed my kids i'm like i'm gonna

stare at them face to face i'm never

going to be distracted as much as i can

in the middle of the night i would fall

asleep i would stare at him face to face

like i started that one early i'm like

i'm mirroring these kids that was that

important to me that was important to me

it was that important guys this is huge

for the parents out there getting that

because this is this is

the leading expert on narcissism and a

lot of other mental health topics and

her ex-husband both have that shared

goal that had to be narcissism i mean

yeah right it had to be empathy wow

because i think that that's that's to

pay it forward that's going to make them

better mothers it's going to make them

better partners it's going to make them

better workers it's going to make them

better leaders it's going to make them

better friends they win everywhere on

that one that's the only quality to me

that matters in a human being and so

there from ev from there all other

things would be built out whatever they

do now you

briefly mentioned that around the age of

eight or nine there was a moment that

you said ah

what was that they were i was actually

watching my daughter play with another

child and then something happened with

what the child was eating or interacting

with and so that child no longer had

that thing and my daughter still had it

might have been like ice cream or

something fell out of a dish

and her face

you could see that she's she almost got

she expected she experienced that person

child's feeling before that child

experienced her feeling and you could

see the hurt in her face and then she's

like we have to help them we have to

help them and i'm like oh sweetie don't

worry about i think she was worried

about the cost and she was even being

empathic she knew i was struggling a

little financially at that point and to

buy another ice cream was gonna cost

money and she's like is it gonna be okay

to get them another i said of course

sweetheart and then we ameliorated the

situation and got a new ice cream but

her caring for me having enough money

that child suffering it was like it

really you know she wasn't like should i

cut mine in half but i already put my

germs in it you know the way a kid

thinks it was so it was absolutely

automatic for her and you know and we

were very lucky they our children went

to an infant care center actually at

ucla where empathy was the main thing

talk to them all day long so you can

build this into caregiving models of you

know and i think that started in infant

care it was in their preschools it was

in their k through i mean i mean

high school it gets harder but it's you

know we'll see how it goes for them like

i said as teenagers it doesn't always

feel like empathy but i see it with

their friends everyone but me and i'm

fine with that

for now yeah they'll become your friends

later um

so eight or nine years old you saw this

empath these empathetic traits earlier

but then it was clear they knew it was

automatic for them when are you

when do people start to exhibit signs of

narcissism here's where we need to be

careful

almost by definition all teenagers look

narcissistic yeah they're deeply

entitled they're arrogant they think

they know they're the uh

uh

what's the type of narcissist i compared

them to david them

you would call them maybe one of the

benign nurses the benign narcissist and

i think that's what it is it is more of

the benign narcissism and i think like

that's why i'd be very loathe to use

that term within adolescence i always

say that adolescence is like wearing a

sweater that's way too big for them

they're just growing into their

personalities they're trying to figure

it out their bodies are changing the

world treats them as like an adult for

one hour as a child for another hour so

it's just hard to say we're a teenager

it really really is it's hard to

interact with a teenager so that

combination means like we're just trying

to put a label on it also i say don't

even use that word with adolescence even

though the pattern seems to fit

i wouldn't start really sort of saying

this pattern's making me super

uncomfortable probably until their early

20s like it's really in place and they

haven't kind of grown out of it whether

they've gone to college or military

service or like trained in a job or

something some of that should be

correcting at that point and that's why

i would really really look for it in

earnest but i would still look for some

of the key issues that they are empathic

as adolescents when they need to be they

may not be to the parents but they

should be with their friends and other

folks in their purview you know are they

really entitled they really believe they

deserve special treatment or you know

kids making noise in a restaurant sure

that's going to happen but like a kid

walking up and saying hey why should i

have to wait in line you know i'm too

important that's the problem yeah all

right well that

that was such a

wonderful explanation of of causes and

there are seven signs to look out for

when spotting a narcissist we're gonna

go through those one by one what's the

first one so the first one's lack of

empathy okay and that's a defining

characteristics

that's a defining characteristic of

narcissism in fact if i see that

somebody has really well preserved

empathy i'm like nah not even happening

so that that to me almost is the

requirement it's the bedrock of this

pattern the second is entitlement

entitlement is that sense is that that

somehow someone is

should deserve special treatment even if

to the detriment of other people that

somehow they are different than everyone

else again sort of special by dentif

their existence

the third is grandiosity it's sort of an

unrealistic assessment of one's capacity

or abilities or they talk about a

grandiose world that they don't even

live in the things that they may someday

do you know someday i'm going to climb

mount everest so they talk about it as

though it's something they're actively

doing or have already done so it's it is

a it is again a very unrealistic almost

fantasy like version of the world

they'll often talk about having one day

the greatest love affair or the greatest

love story or the greatest wedding or

the greatest career everything is just

bigger and larger than life

number four is superficiality there's a

very vapid quality to narcissism they're

really only concerned about appearances

how a person looks um what a person owns

where they live what they drive what

they carry their shoes on their feet

it's very very superficial to the

detriment of other characteristics

somebody out there might say oh but i

love fashion but they're a very sweet

kind person that's not what we're

talking about we're talking about

superficiality with absolutely no depth

behind it or judging people solely on

superficial

characteristics and quality

number five is chronic seeking of

admiration or validation it's the

constant need to be be receiving praise

recognition and nowadays that's really

amped up because of social media that

they have to get likes and they have to

get lots of traction on their social

media page and they need lots of

followers and all of that so it's that

constant but it never stops if you're

even close to them like you're their

child or you're their partner you have

to constantly be telling them how

wonderful they are and how great they

are and way beyond the thing that

they've done it's almost a nuisance to

get a gift from a narcissist because you

have to thank them for it so many times

it had been easier to buy it yourself

um

number six is their tendency to rage

they don't they don't have good command

of their emotions they tend to be all

over the map and the one emotion they

tend to manifest the most often is

uncontrolled rage that's often because

they're so frustrated and they're so

insecure and they don't have good ways

of dealing with their feelings so it's

not unusual for them to just come out

when things don't go their way they

don't have any tolerance for frustration

so you'll see a lot of rage that comes

out

and number seven i'd really say is

arrogance it's um i'm better than you

and in some ways that sort of draws from

the grandiosity it draws from the

entitlement but it can come off as a

snobbery as a dismissiveness as a

devaluation as an invalidation of other

people just sort of like sweeping them

away and so those are some of the seven

key character characteristics in my book

i actually lay out what i call 31

characteristics it's like i think it's a

lot more than just the seven and it

takes in a lot more territory jealousy

envy getting pleasure out of other

people's misery um

lying cheating um

you know things all a lot of really

negative interpersonal patterns people

who are narcissistic often engage in

projection they make their faults and

flaws yours like i didn't say that i

didn't do that you they'll accuse you of

something they did and they'll blink

you'll often be quite confused they

engage in dynamics like gaslighting

where they question your reality and

make you feel like you're literally

losing your mind like that never had

they'll say things like that never

happened you know but

but it did but it did and then you'll

start questioning yourself

right and people who spend enough time

with narcissists find themselves plagued

with self-doubt because narcissists so

question they're oh so often question

their reality so with those seven do

they have to have all seven of those you

know the dsm has a list of nine which

takes in most of those you only need

five of the nine plus this idea that

life isn't going well that distress to

get it in the dsm i often i'm actually a

little more generous i say like you need

to have like if you have all if you have

five of those seven you're in trouble

but the emp the lack of empathy is the

requirement to me oh everything so it's

like that plus four or five others and

a huge

takeaway for me was in our last episode

when you talk about empathy and how it

related to raising your kids so if you

haven't seen that episode make sure you

go back one and take a look there

because that was just absolutely for me

phenomenal phenomenal um

how quickly if i'm just at a party and i

meet people can i

find out if someone's a narcissist i

mean i'm a pro and i'm in and out in 15

seconds like i got this thing

i got this like before i even wait wait

so it's a fighter depression our session

is gonna be 15 seconds you can you know

what he's at a party it's almost easier

right because i know it's kind of mean i

probably like cast out a few

it might take me longer some people if

there are narcissists you're going to be

able to tell quickly sometimes it takes

you a little longer if it's a bit more

subtle or covert or something like that

but it can happen pretty quickly you

know watch the back and forth of the

conversation

is there a genuine curiousness

about you like do you do you walk up to

them and say hi nice to meet you i'm

romini and you'll say hi i'm kyle and

then it's the kyle show

and by the time this conversation is

done there's no sense of anything about

me and not even an opportunity for me to

have offered that

you know it also might be how they

conduct themselves in that like do they

just keep talking about themselves and

only in these sort of unrealistically

glowing terms do they almost seem too

but that the other extreme they also may

be a little bit too slick and too smooth

like you know maybe not like they're

coming on to you but like it's just

almost too charming i find charming

people terrifying because i know that's

often like the soft sign that

psychopathy or narcissism is coming

around the corner so charming people i

actually like uncharming people like the

more socially awkward you are the more

i'm like this could be a real sure

this is great yeah wonderful sign me up

so if i meet somebody and i suspect

they're a narcissist because they're

only talking about themselves they're

not interested in me at all they're very

grandiose in their uh the content that

they're putting out there

are there any questions i could ask them

that could give me some

instant feedback you know what you can

do is ask them something that has more

that pulls them away from talking about

their work like let's say they're

talking bragging about work work work

they're sort of like only talking about

one thing try to change it to something

else like what are the things that bring

you joy like really ask them like a

feely question

and they feel like

like they just sort of like become like

huh

feeling

i'm going to go get another martini like

they run away that's probably a sign

like if you it's sort of a game for me

at a party if i think i've met a

narcissist i'll say can you tell me

about a little bit about your inner

world because i know what you do now and

the i'll often get people who look at me

like i just i'm speaking in tongues and

they'll often say i see someone over

there i gotta go

and they'll often really cut the

conversation people are gonna be so

nervous when they meet you at a party

now like hey by the way i'm not a

narcissist i know i tell you i'm not

sure like i'm out um that's also a show

i would definitely watch you on with a

hidden camera just meeting people yeah

yeah in la it's actually it's it's

bloodsport here because it's good

it's fishing with dynamite well it's

like growing it's like seashell

collecting yeah at the end of a party

you've got like enough you've got it i

mean

i know we joke about how narcissistic la

is but it really is true it really is

true yeah we live here we work here it's

a insanity it really is

yeah but here's one thing that you want

to be i mean again i don't want people

dismissing people in like the first 15

seconds they need them let's say someone

does talk about themselves a lot the

other thing you do want to be mindful of

is they may be socially anxious

so they may have trouble kind of taking

and rolling with it that's why i'm

saying if you could slow the

conversation down maybe even make it

about something that's happening around

you like something very sweet like

something that you know they're drinking

or something special they may be wearing

with but making them make it more

special not like well this is the

designer label but try to make it about

the moment what's personal and see where

they can go with it to share a little of

yourself also start talking about

yourself a little they've done their

whole dog and pony show

see what happens when you start talking

about yourself if they glaze over or

they start using their phone at that

point

not a good sign

if i do find myself in a situation

where i'm in a relationship whether it's

romantic or otherwise with a narcissist

what can i do

wait well that's you know here it is

it's gonna it's gonna be painful if you

really and by the time a lot of people

detect these patterns it's been years

sometimes

if we're lucky they don't have kids

together

because that can start getting messy if

the relationship goes south because a

custody battle with a narcissist

is is

it's war it's it's one of the most

painful things i've ever witnessed if

you sense that that's where things are

going

you need to get yourself into therapy

right away and you want to get the

couple into therapy the challenge with

couples therapy with a narcissist is

unless you've got one very skilled

therapist that narcissist can really

play the therapist

and i've seen that happen many many

times you want to be really really

careful how do they play the therapist

they win them over they charm them and

sometimes the narcissist is sort of the

more

materially successful or the more

successful seeming partner and they'll

kind of

again they'll charm them they'll charm

them you have to be somebody who just

dislikes charm to really not be charmed

right so they'll really play them and

work them and and flatter them and

narcissists actually are quite good at

sort of sniffing out

how to validate another person because

they are they need it so much they're

really good at dispensing it when they

need to wow so they can really work the

game but it's important you get therapy

you consider getting yourselves into

therapy you pay attention to the

patterns and you really have to do some

hard looks into the mirror on if

if this is as good as it's ever going to

get which is probably the case can you

live with this forever that's the

question and if it's if you don't like

that then you've got one of two paths

either you've got to adjust your

expectations this is how it's always

going to be or you got to get out well

and those two paths is what we will be

discussing next you you mentioned to me

off camera that there are people in a

relationship with a narcissist and they

don't even really realize that they're

being abused yeah explain that there's a

couple of reasons that could happen one

is what i call sort of the historical

reason they may have come from a family

where one or both parents or someone's

significant in a family system was

narcissistic or abusive so for them

abuse and

relationships go together went back to

the mirroring thing right so they just

don't even like everyone's gonna that's

all i deserve this is how i'm treated

and so they're often an easy mark for

getting in with a narcissist whereas

other people might have already broken

up with the narcissist they end up with

they stick it out because it's almost a

sense of they they were sort of raised

up in that and so they don't even think

they deserve more or they just don't

question it and so they're used to

saying well maybe if i try harder

they'll love me maybe if i try harder so

it can it becomes a sense of

it's a self-blame the self-approach i

this is my fault they're telling me that

they're yelling at me because i didn't

keep the house clean or i don't look

good or

the kids were noisy or i don't make

enough money or i'm out of the house too

much or whatever the reasons are and

they actually blame themselves keep

thinking if i fix this this and this

then maybe this will turn around

and what types of relationships do you

find

narcissism a problem the most i would

say where you know listen the two sets

of relationships where i think it is

most problematic is in an intimate

partnership like a husband wife

boyfriend girlfriend kind of thing or a

parental relationship when it is your

parent because the parental relationship

is if you have a narcissistic mother or

father or perhaps step parent

that sets a tone that you're going to

take into adulthood and it's going to

color how you choose a partner what you

endure in a job it just your your own

sense of self-worth so many things in

the long term can get harmed by having a

narcissistic parent it's not it's by no

means a sentence and i've seen many

people have had brutally narcissistic

parents who go on to joyful lives so

it's not like you're doomed but it

definitely is a vulnerability then in

the flip side is obviously when you meet

someone and you think you believe you've

fallen in love with them and you try to

make a life with them and they spend

their days dehumanizing you invalidating

you yelling at you putting you down

disrespecting you that's miserable and

you really you might stick it out

because you feel like you have to or i'm

not loving them well enough it's you

know sort of what i call the beauty and

the beast fantasy maybe if i love the

beast enough he'll turn into a prince

and there's a lot of people who sort of

fall into that bucket and so it those

are the two relationships where i see

it's the most harmful but you know

listen if you have a narcissistic boss

they can throw off your career if you

have a narcissistic sibling you might

feel like you don't have a confident but

i do think the parents the partners

that's really where the rubber meets the

road

what triggers narcissist narcissistic

abuse

well what triggers narcissistic abuse is

the insecurity and the ego of the

narcissist being threatened and they

explode with narcissistic rage the

problem is for a while you can't figure

out what it is that's setting this

narcissist off it can often be the

littlest slight it could be that they

had a bad day somewhere else and they're

taking it out on you it's like coming

home and yelling at a pet because you

can't yell at your boss kind of thing so

you don't know what the thing that set

it off but all you do know for sure is

somewhere along the day their ego got

injured they felt out of control their

insecurity boiled over and it's the

people closest to them that often feel

like they're easiest targets especially

if you keep forgiving them and giving

them second chances then they're like oh

this is great i can keep coming home and

doing this get all my rage out this

person's still sticking around great

would a narcissist date somebody for

let's say five years then get married

and then

start the abuse no a lot of people say

well they became narcissistic after we

were married i was like oh no they did

not that's good to know the first date

it was there narcissism is a pattern

that's that that you bring into it from

early adulthood on i mean it was

developing all along right but it's

there from the jump and when we do sort

of the autopsy on the relationship and

really go right back to the beginning

they'll say

yeah i guess he was late to all our

first few dates and there was a lot of

really poor boundaries and

one time he got screamed at me because i

mistakenly ate his order of fried rice

or whatever it may be that the patterns

were there they just were romanticizing

it because like and he wanted to spend

all this time with me wanted to be with

me 24 7. that's amazing alarm bell

that's really controlling this this

series is about narcissism as a general

uh topic however

i look at this a lot as

the

the the series to watch if you're going

to start dating amen

this

knowing this information having this

power having this education

allows you to avoid

5 10 15 20 maybe 40 years of disaster

you better believe that prevention in

this case is the best cure if we could

keep people from getting these

relationships in the first place because

what you got to remember is i've known

people who actually were well put

together kind empathic relatively

confident they'd get into a relationship

with a narcissist 15 years later they're

a shell of their prior selves they're

riddled with self-doubt they they've

complete an utter loss of self-esteem

they don't know which way is up they

completely think they're undeserving i

mean it really does a number on them

from the inside out so if we could stop

it from the first place because what

ends up happening is once a person's in

people will often fight for a

relationship

so that's where you want to stop them

from getting in in the first place and

especially if you have kids oh once

you're especially if you're financially

dependent on that and many narcissists

try to make their partner financially

dependent on them they ensure that they

quit their jobs or you know make it so

that because that's one way they can

make sure that person doesn't leave them

and allows them to control them because

control is a big part of the

narcissistic dynamic yeah

it's i'm i'm so thankful that i'm

learning all this um

if you find yourself getting getting

abused by a narcissist in a romantic

relationship what are your tips for that

person if you're being abused in a

narcissistic relationship first of all

i'm always going to say especially to

med circle listeners if you're being

physically abused or any other abuse

that's putting yourself or other or

children or other dependent adults in

that environment at danger you must get

help and i'm hoping med circle might

even be able to put like a connection to

the national domestic

hotline because you've got to get help

immediately um that's that's that's a

danger in a risk situation beyond that

we're really getting also into

psychological abuse which and emotional

abuse which to me are equally harmful

equally harmful as physical abuse that

you need to ensure that you're getting

appropriate mental health services uh

perhaps even through a support group

that other people being affected by this

narcissistic abuse like kids are getting

mental health services because they're

seeing this happen

make sure that you take care of you

because it's very easy for your health

to fail when you're in a relationship

with the narcissist i've seen people get

very very ill due to a variety of stress

related illnesses and i had to wonder

how much of this was really due to years

of being in a relationship with a

narcissist

cultivate other support networks people

who are narcissistic often try to

isolate their partners they don't want

them to get the support and validation

of other people so break out of that

isolation if it's friends at work

friends at your spiritual community your

church your temple whatever you know but

find a way to get those people you can

someone at the gym

somewhere create friendships in other

spaces so you don't get too far down the

rabbit hole family members just to get

that dose of reality that kind of thing

all of those things become important you

need a reality check a lot of times

people it's almost like you want people

to see you with that person but here's

the thing a lot of time narcissistic

people don't verbally abuse their

partners in front of other people

they're smart enough to know they gotta

look good to the public and they save

that for behind closed doors or in the

car or whatever

yeah that's what i was just thinking is

first having the courage and education

and wherewithal to know i'm in this

scenario yeah this is this is bad this

is hurting me and it's likely because of

this yeah i think people are afraid to

admit that they're very they're ashamed

there's a lot of shame it's so sad i've

worked with many people who are in a

relationship with a narcissist and they

were horribly ashamed and embarrassed

that they let it get this far and i said

you know what it's not like it went from

this to this in a day no this has been

happening over time and you've almost

sadly slowly been adjusting to this

change in the climate and now you're

here and yes it looks gruesome from here

but this didn't happen overnight and

we're not going to be able to undo it

overnight yeah it's the frog it's the

frog

yeah but the frog can still jump out

yeah so yeah but until the frog gets

boiled to death yes that's the problem

we're trying to catch people before that

yes we are

what about people who are who have a

work relationship uh and their their

co-worker is narcissistic and abusing

them how do they handle that

when you have a co-worker who's behaving

in that way you've really got to protect

your interests because most hr

departments can't do much without

documentation

i tell people when you're in that

situation you as soon as you start a new

job create little email folders for

everyone you work with and save

everything hopefully you never need it

and 40 years down the road you had the

most exam wonderful career and you just

they clear out your account and it's

done now it's not going to be most

people so you save everything and it

starts to get a little wonky and you

have to be very careful because if it's

a company server you may need to print

hard copies of these emails you may not

have access to that you may not be able

to do stuff with that at work make sure

you create files when you work with

difficult co-workers save every email

save text messages

i mean we're talking everything um

when you try to avoid meeting with them

one-on-one alone if that's possible if

you can have someone else in the room

with you and you know it may sound weird

you don't have to make it hostile but

try to make it that there's other people

present because then that gives you you

know again another another set of ears

however if you can't have that one thing

i recommend people who have a

narcissistic co-worker they're concerned

about create a memo after the meeting

send the memo say i just want to make

sure that this is a very clear review of

what we just met use quotes wherever

possible put a read receipt on the email

so you know they received the memo and

then keep that as a keep these things as

records and so you really want to ensure

that you have that because you can't do

much in terms of hr or with an attorney

until you have all of that but we also

know

that workplace stress is actually the

type of stress most associated with

developing physical illness so it really

is important that we manage your

workplace stress once again consider

getting therapy have a safe confidential

space don't don't don't make this about

workplace gossip it's so easy to have

those whispered conversations then

you're the one who might end up getting

into trouble don't post your words it's

not going to attract anything not going

to fix anything don't put your workplace

strife on social media if you have a

narcissistic co-worker and they don't go

and they decide to go there don't get in

the mud with them you've got to play a

clean game when it's this kind of

situation make sure you engage in

self-care and then you might want to

slowly but surely if you feel like the

writing's on the wall let's say this

narcissistic co-worker has outlasted

everyone yeah maybe that the culture of

the company is that they're not going to

get rid of this person maybe it's the

boss exactly and if it's the boss you

have even more problems same rules but

you may need to start working on an exit

strategy sadly we do know that there's

some interesting research that has come

out that when people work in a

narcissist like with a toxic

narcissistic boss that you'll sometimes

find that they band together and do some

interesting work together can actually

cause like when you're united around a

common enemy that can create something

interesting the boss is narcissistic and

the co the workers might actually all

unite so that can sometimes be a nice

downstream effect make sure you have

allies at work you know

people you can turn to not for gossip

but just to ensure that you're

protecting yourself but also realize you

may need to cut your losses it may be

the dream job but it's not the dream job

if you're working with toxic colleagues

slowly craft an escape strategy and do

it quietly because in some places they

may be vindictive enough to stop you

from trying to get a new position it can

get really dark really really fast i

hope people have their pen and paper out

for that because that was a lot of

actionable amazing tips

what about the support okay

i have a friend who's in a relationship

with a narcissist how do i help that

friend

number one

do

not call their partner out because that

person is going to feel the need to

defend their partner don't okay don't

call don't call the partner out in any

circumstance no definitely point out the

patterns and the behaviors and listen

non-judgmentally it can be very

overwhelming it's so hard because you

want to say here's my text

right now and to say you really want to

say

it it hurts to hear this

it must be heard even more to be

experiencing it that's good you know so

when someone you love is telling you

that they're being hurt in a

relationship your temptation is just one

to go tear that person's throat out be

with your friends pain but don't give

them an unrealistic plan say right now

we're going to your house we're getting

your stuff we're getting out they may

not be willing to do that and that might

scare them to even talk with you more

listen listen non-judgmentally tell them

like this doesn't feel okay this feels

like abuse to me are you okay and then

ask them the dollar question

how can i help

we all want to give advice we all want

to get in there and fix it how can i

help your friend may say you know what

you're helping just listen you know and

i'm going to be calling you in the

middle of the night and say i'm here

instead of saying okay let's rent you an

apartment right now let's do this right

now you know

that's overwhelming and a person may be

really really freaked out so when our

when our our loved ones are struggling

we often want to get in there and do

what i call casseroling like somebody

died here's a tuna casserole i'm like i

don't know that they want that maybe

they just need you to listen and if they

want a tuna casserole trust me i'll tell

you

yeah so

ask them how can i help in

conducting all these interviews with you

and lots of other experts

the power of asking

a question

to somebody you love

is probably the best way to show support

if you ask it without judgment yes if

you ask it with sincerity and if you ask

it without trying to get anything from

them not like well do you think moving

would help that's not the right question

right but how can i help

i'm sorry you're going through that that

must be tough those questions

i mean are so simple they're so easy

they're huge and also don't second-guess

them a person in a narcissistic

relationship is being second-guessed and

doubted 100 times a day the last thing

you want to do is say

are you sure that's happening that's

gaslighting your friend and that's you

now you're participating in the abuse

yes you know i mean you listen to your

friend why is your friend gonna lie

about this and if this is their track

record of lying about this stuff you

need to find a new get a new friend you

know so i mean but you really if this is

because odds are by the time they're

coming and telling you this it's been

going on for a while yes

wow

uh

i loved everything that you put out here

because it gave me

one big sigh of relief that there is

hope

people are out there dealing with a

narcissist you know the thing that

happens to people who are narcissistic

relationships is a phenomenon we call

learned helplessness

you know theoretical model that came out

in the 1970s but when it plays out here

a person in a relationship with a

narcissist feels that nothing they do

helps no matter what they say what they

do

how they communicate how they look

anything ever changes anything

so they start feeling helpless and they

get paralyzed and then they get stuck

and many times they often become can

also become depressed because learned

helplessness is considered to be part of

the developmental model of depression so

it is a it's that sense of nothing i'm

doing is working when you're in a

relationship with someone and you feel

like nothing you're doing is working

that could be a real ringer that you're

in a relationship with a narcissist well

luckily we provided plenty of tips

plenty of actionable steps for people to

take but the question remains is there

hope for the narcissist themselves dr

romney okay so first of all you gotta

you gotta get him into the therapy room

right

so

most narcissists do not come into

therapy saying

hi

i'm a narcissist yes and i need some

therapy yeah i had i did have one person

in my career do that and literally

walked in the door that's what he said

i'm a narcissist and i want therapy i

said have a seat let's see what we can

do

and well hold on and was he a narcissist

what a narcissistic personality disorder

yeah and what kind of health did he get

it's long-term insight-oriented work but

it's slow it's really really slow and

he's very committed

to growing to

to doing better he wants this and it's

it's an incredibly slow process and this

is a guy who wants it

so

when people say is there a treatment

model that works well with them i would

say we typically learn a person is

narcissistic in therapy because they

came in with some other problem i'm

having problems with my girlfriend it

might be substance use i've been feeling

sad work isn't going well i'm not

getting along with my boss

i'm mad at my mother so they'll come in

with something else

and then they'll tell you their story

and maybe by the first or second session

they'll be like oh i'm getting this you

might even notice in the first session

because there'll be a real antagonism

from them to you

is the sorry but

we mentioned in a previous episode very

quickly you can spot if someone's a

narcissist you specifically if you're at

a party in a therapy session it takes

you one longer is it because they're

guarded they're guarded and we're having

a very curated kind of conversation

we're getting a history and all of that

you might pick some of the top notes up

pretty quickly like they'll talk about

all their achievements and i once had

somebody say you want to know how many

cars i own let me tell you how many cars

i own one person said i could buy and

sell you 20 times over and i was

thinking more like 40 but okay um you

know so some of it's like like right out

there like you'd really what is your

reaction when someone says that you know

i mean utter humility i'm like that you

know that's so interesting but i

actually don't care

so let's you know okay did you say you

don't care then what do they say they'll

say they'll look offended and i'll say

you know i'm actually trying to learn

your inner world the other stuff that's

that's all fluff to me

you know so please tell me about we're

going to work on this inside and that's

of course terrifying because those

shelves are a lot more empty yeah that's

why they have 20 cars exactly that's

right 20 cars but you know there's no

kind of there's nothing but room at the

end kind of thing so it's that that's

the struggle but

i have to say that you often end up

working on the thing they came into

therapy with the relationship problem

the substance use issue whatever it is

okay

but then you start working backwards on

the other you know we dig deeper what

was childhood like what was you know

how do they manage frustration how do

they manage anger and rage a lot of the

work of therapy in working with a

narcissistic client is building a

trusting therapeutic alliance

you gotta like them and i gotta tell you

i've worked some people brutally

brutally narcissistic i like them i mean

some of them i've really liked i could

i'm like wow i see the vulnerability and

i'll even say that i'll say i see the

beautiful little boy and i'm so sad the

world missed out on this and they'll cry

and they'll cry a lot you know like and

i'll see it like there's and they're not

playing

there's no point i'm gonna get paid the

same whether or not i'm saying nice

stuff you know what i'm saying like it's

not like i get a paid on per compliment

basis true right so

you're trying to you want to make you

want to get them to come in every week

because something's happening sometimes

i try to outplay or outwit you and tell

you i know more things than you and i

said you know what i'm always i'm always

a student so teach me so what i don't do

is get in the mud with them i don't

defend myself you know if they don't

feel you know if they don't feel like

i'm good enough and i've heard that like

you know you're not that good i'll say

that's absolutely important they feel i

am good and i have a list of referrals

and i pull it out of my desk and i say i

actually highly recommend these

therapists as well so they're used to

people going you know going you know

head to head with them i don't play that

game and i think good therapists who

work with narcissists don't so it's

really that you work on the current

issue you work backwards you try to

create a strong consistent empathic

therapeutic alliance when they tell you

a sad story you genuinely feel sadness

you'll say my gosh that's so sad and you

know what i'll often get is i never

thought of it that way and i'll say

really because i'm actually feeling that

inside and then we'll break that down

wow the difference in our two emotional

experiences so you sort of learn in the

moment i try to work on mindfulness

techniques with them like how do they

catch themselves before they say the

hurtful words how do they manage the

anger what's the sort we ask them what

the source of the anger is so it's

really about it's cognitive behavioral

work but it's a lot of it's humanistic

work

there is something good in there and my

job it's almost like being a prospector

we're going to find it yeah we're going

to show it to them and we're going to

cultivate it and so it's some of its

existential work can they learn to start

taking responsibility for the hurts they

perpetrate on other people and perhaps

try to find another path next time

if you're willing to do that kind of

depth work we might be able to get you

somewhere but it is they're baby steps

let's say a really high functioning

empathic solid person is sitting up here

the kind of person is going to take care

of you if you're sick and is there for

you and doesn't need validation all the

time okay and a narcissist is down here

okay

or even down here we're not getting them

here right we're not getting them here

we're going to get him here and maybe

that's enough that might be enough to

say all right i'll stay in the marriage

i realize it's not satisfying or

someone's like all right i'll try to

cultivate a relationship with my dad but

realize it may not be what i wanted or

yeah okay like you know i can try to

keep working with this person if you

getting them from here to here is

herculean this isn't possible and if

this is the standard it's not going to

fly

one of the traits of a narcissist is

that they lie

and one of the keys to successful

therapy is honesty yeah so how do

you make that happen depends on what

they're lying about it depends on what

they're lying about

they may lie about certain

ridiculous kinds of achievements

they might exaggerate the carat weight

of a diamond ring or the price of a

purse it's such nonsense i wouldn't know

you know what i'm saying you tell me the

bag or the car costs this much it's

irrelevant it's really things like are

they lying about whether or not they're

using substances

are they being honest about something we

made an agreement to be honest about and

be making that a high stakes game like

it's almost like a contract you make

with them say this is only going to work

if you're honest with me the

confidentiality brought about by therapy

helps a lot because you can't say like

hey i'm going to call all your friends

and say that blah blah blah you're

having an affair or something like that

that's not i'm not going to do that

right so it sort of stops kind of there

and um

so it is it's about creating that

becomes an honest space the lying really

there's no incentive

they're not trying to date me so i'm not

going to be impressed by their car you

know what i'm saying because nothing

like that is happening so it's in some

ways you might have to catch them in

their patterns like gosh you come in

here a lot and you talk a lot about all

the stuff you have and while i'm sure

you enjoy it and while i'm sure it's

beautiful it's really not relevant in

here and it's getting in the way of me

getting to know you

you know and so you're kind of taking

away their usual um their usual tools

are there medications that can work

depends on what else an art person with

narcissism is living with everyone

wishes there was a magic pill of course

everyone beg there's got to be something

he could take there's no jerk pill yeah

like if there was the anti-jerk pill big

pharma would be making more money than

they already are just me okay so

sometimes people will try things like

antidepressants with people with

narcissism because they are having sort

of an irritable edge sometimes it works

sometimes it doesn't sometimes people

use anti-anxiety medication with

narcissists because they're having

anxiety about a specific situation in

their life typically because they're not

getting enough validation sometimes

they'll be drugs used to manage issues

around addiction but that's much more

specific to the addiction and it's not

going to address the narcissism

but it would be the other things kind of

hanging out with the narcissism that

you'd use medication for there is no

known medication out there that is

labeled for use to manage or treat

narcissistic personality disorder

or narcissistic traits

if a couple is in therapy or couples

that you've personally had have you ever

suggested to the non-narcissist and in

the couple

leave

if i'm working with a couple i've never

done that but

god i've been tempted i mean like you

almost wanted to slip them a note like

on their way out right ethically it's

not how i roll

if there's a case of domestic violence


[Music]

watch this full series at the links in

the description below and subscribe to

our youtube channel to watch new mental

health videos every week in our med

circle series on cognitive behavioral

therapy dr judy and i sat down to

discuss the ins and outs of how that

therapy works and how it can be used to

change your thoughts your emotions and

ultimately your behaviors and then we

decided that we would do a mock therapy

session with myself portraying

somebody who has a

a cognitive belief or what is it yeah a

certain kind of core belief core belief

core belief yes

and you're going to walk me through that

belief and show the viewers

how cbt can actually bring them closer

to the truth and closer to a more

healthy way to think and react and

behave when it comes to our emotions and

thoughts

so my core belief in this

mock therapy session is going to be that

i feel like i'm unlovable right by

everybody right that's my core belief i

feel like i'm pretty lovable by most

people yeah i'm sure not everybody

kyle's actual core belief right exactly

you are playing a patient in which

um

has that core belief and i think it's a

common core belief for people whether

they want to admit it or not that's

right um and it makes sense because it's

one of our basic drives is to be loved

by people i mean that's just a basic

human drive and it's not just about

emotional wellness that you feel loved

it's actually about physical survival if

you're not loved and nurtured then you

might die right you know your physical

being will actually perish right if

you're not nurtured well if you're not

taken care of well and so i think this

is a good one for us to role play cool

well this will be great for the viewers

to see what a therapy session could be

like and also how cbt is used so i'll

let you take it away okay great so kyle

what brings you in today

i

uh recently

broke up with a long long-term partner

and

it's been one of

many breakups i've had in my life

and at this point i'm getting older i

have gray hair

i feel like the clock is ticking and

i don't feel like i will ever find

somebody who

loves me i don't feel like

i feel like i would have found him

already i feel like i've dated enough

people to make that happen and it's not

happening and i don't see

anything changing and my depression is

through the roof because of it

okay so i'm sorry about your breakup and

i'm sorry that kind of led to a cascade

of thoughts in your head about what this

really means about your future for

relationships and about you ultimately

so we're going to do a

practice technique right now and this

technique is called laddering and what

this is going to help us with is getting

some of those negative automatic

thoughts i mean you said many right now

actually just in your description we're

going to work with one of those and it

helps us to get them organized in a way

so that you can actually see what that

automatic thought leads to sort of like

if you think about automatic thoughts

being kind of like an iceberg and the

automatic thoughts is the tip of the

iceberg that you can see above the water

it's conscious but you have to kind of

attune your awareness to it

but

deeper thoughts are actually submerged

you can't see them they're below the

water level and that's what we need to

get to because that's the crux of the

issue these core beliefs drive how you

feel how you think and even the rules

that you have in life about how you

should behave in order to have

safety in many ways and so let's start

with an automatic thought i heard you

say that you were thinking based on this

breakup and other ones that

i might never find somebody who will

love me

yeah so let's work with that automatic

thought there were other ones but i

think this one is a good one to work

with so if your automatic thought is i'm

not going to find somebody who loves me

what might that mean

what does that thought mean to you

well

i look around at my friends and my

family who are in relationships who are

having kids

who are

posting pictures who are

sending out christmas cards with their

significant others and i don't

feel like i

will have that i feel like while

everyone else

will have love in their life

and meaning and purpose

i will have nothing i will be alone and

i am alone and i am also

lonely

right and that is devastating so what

might it mean if you were alone like

let's take that part of it so you know

you kind of broke it down like well i

don't think that i'm going to find

anybody to love me or who i love or who

will have this relationship with and and

to me that means that i'll be alone so

what would it mean if you were alone

like what if that did happen what would

that mean about you

well on one hand it means that nobody i

on one hand it means that people

wouldn't

i'm alone it means that people don't

want to be with me

which is

right awful it's an awful thought um

and it also means that i

won't be able to enjoy life how i could

i will miss out on dinners and holidays

and weekend trips and

children and legacy and memories

there are there's a laundry list of

consequences from being alone right and

you had just said that one of the things

that being alone means would be that

maybe that means nobody wants to be with

you

and so what would that thought mean if

it was true what if nobody wanted to be

with you what if that was an actual fact

like what would that mean

that there's something wrong with me

and if there is something wrong with you

if that thought was true

then what would that mean

that i haven't done a good job in my

life

could be becoming

i haven't done a good job becoming

somebody that people want to be around

right that people want to be in a

relationship with right and what would

that mean about you if people didn't

want to be in a relationship with you

that

you haven't done a good job and

people didn't want to be around you

that i'm

hope that i'm worthless and i'm a waste

of time yeah well that's the core belief

the core belief is

i'm worthless or

sometimes people will say i'm unlovable

sometimes they're interchangeable but

like

that's how we got to the core belief is

we keep doing this laddering technique

where

any negative thought you have i ask you

what does that mean if that thought was

true what would that mean about you okay

well if that thought was true that would

mean that i would be alone okay well

what would that mean if that was true if

you were alone well that would mean that

nobody would want to be around me you

know and you kind of kept breaking it

down to like the deeper and deeper level

until you got to this idea of

that would mean that i was worthless

that maybe i'm just not capable of being

loved that i'm undeserving of love and

that's what we mean

by a core belief which is like a

horrible thing to have to think about

and i want to be clear that core beliefs

are not necessarily what you actually

believe about yourself but core beliefs

are

your biggest fear

meaning that if it was true it would be

devastating if you truly were worthless

or if you truly were unlovable

that would be

devastating i don't feel

if you would have asked me three minutes

ago or four minutes ago do you do you

think you're

do you think you're a worthless person i

would have said no

not at all right yeah

and i think that when people first

encounter what could be their

uh core belief they

they have that kind of reaction of

but i don't really believe it's true at

least not intellectually

but it's really about the fear of

man but what if it was true like what

would that mean about my life and what i

could even amount to and

what kind of legacy would i leave behind

if that was true

and everybody has different fears for

different reasons some people's core

belief is you know i'm incapable you

know and that to them is paralyzing like

man if i wasn't capable like

that could ruin my life you know and

it's not that they actually believe

they're incapable but it's just like oh

my gosh if that was true

the consequences to my life would be

devastating and i wouldn't even be able

to tolerate it

and so this is sort of what we're

working with and i always say when we

get to our core belief it doesn't

necessarily have to be your core belief

but let's

let's work with it let's see if it is

you know part of this is sort of like

hypothesis testing like let's work with

that and see if that could be true for

you okay when people have core beliefs

they usually then have conditional rules

and assumptions about how the world will

work and how they should act within that

world so what i mean by this is when you

have such a core belief like i'm

worthless or i'm unlovable there will be

certain things that you believe are

scripts that you have to follow

in order to have any semblance of

emotional safety

or to prevent yourself from having that

core belief come true

and so we're going to talk about what

some of those things could be for you

when somebody has a um worthless core

belief

what might that do

in terms of

your expression of your needs

and wants to other people like what rule

might you have if you actually believe

that

you might be worthless or that you fear

that that might be true

what kind of rule would you

put on yourself in terms of how you

could communicate

your needs and wants to others

well i would uh

i would probably only

in terms of a romantic relationship i

would probably only date someone who i

felt

uh

was

like below my league i guess yeah that's

a rude thing to say but um it's honest

and i think you're not um alone in that

um

because if i if if i truly was worthless

then i would need to be with somebody

else who couldn't see that

who would never know that i was

worthless right and so i would need to

date um accordingly

right um i i wouldn't go after the

people that i actually wanted to date

because they're too smart to figure it

out right that's at least that would be

like a possible thinking there yeah and

and i would also uh

try to show my worth

a lot

even though i believed i'm worthless i

would try to show well

look at the great house i have and look

at how happy i'm being and look how fun

my friends are and look at my cool job

and look at look at look at look at see

i'm not worthless i'm not worthless i'm

not worthless right yeah no those are um

excellent um examples of the types of

rules you might have when that is your

core belief and might you also have a

type of rule where you felt like in

certain situations you had to contribute

something so that there would be worth

so like even in friendships for example

like how are you like always about them

as opposed to oh now we can talk about

me for 20 minutes right do you find

yourself sometimes doing that with your

friends yes okay i'm always

forever for as long as i can remember

constantly

making sure that the other person was

happy with our interaction first

professionally friendship romantic

familial are you happy with our

interaction constantly i i constantly

remember thinking are you happy about

this because i want to make sure you're

happy about this because i don't want

you to have an interaction with me where

you're not happy right right okay so

again another great example of a

possible

assumption or rule that you might put on

yourself when this is the core belief

and so

as you might imagine there's a long list

of these if we sat here for two hours we

could probably come up with like 20

other rules that probably play some role

in your life but i want to move on to

the problem-solving phase you know

because that's what cbt is all about

it's like let's solve the problem so

yeah i love that part wow so we've

identified the issue and there's been

very many different ways in which you

can work with your core beliefs but you

have to remember that these core beliefs

have been there for a long time and

they're kind of pervasive like this idea

of

i'm worthless as you just demonstrated

it's not just about your romantic

relationships it's about how you

interact with friends with professional

people with colleagues whatever

there's permeating of sorts in almost

all the domains of your life and so what

we're going to do now is one of my

favorite ways to work with core beliefs

and assumptions once we've identified

them and that is to create an

individualized behavioral experiment

okay to try to see if your core beliefs

and the assumptions that follow them

actually apply to every single situation

as i mentioned core beliefs feel

pervasive

and

we want to make them more conditional

you know we want to make it so that well

you know in certain situations and with

certain people they may make me feel

this way and maybe that even comes from

childhood but it doesn't apply to every

single thing right and the way that we

shake that is to actually get evidence

cbt is a scientific

program and this is kind of like our

mini science experiment that we're going

to do together

so

there's only a couple of rules for this

experiment we're going to design an

experiment around one of your rules or

assumptions and the one that i want to

use which i think is a good one to do

because you want to start with a lower

hanging fruit that's not too

activating but we shouldn't start with

the rule of you dating people who might

be

of a different level than you because

that one is a little bit deeper but we

start with something that feels like you

can approach it and there's a little bit

of risk it makes you a little

uncomfortable but not like the worst

thing that could happen

and i think that that would apply to the

rule of i always have to take care of

other people's needs first

because there's a lot of people that

applies to it it can apply to your

intimate relationships but it can also

apply to friends colleagues anybody else

that you meet

so

let's take that rule

and let's try to test it with a person

in your life and i would also say that

again this person should not be the most

activating person but this should be a

person who there's some stakes in it

there's some skin in the game but

this is not a person in which if this

experiment failed meaning that like you

tried to challenge this assumption and

they failed it in some way and actually

made your core belief feel more um

significant to you

that

you would feel bad about it but you

wouldn't be so bad that you would be in

pieces so is there a person like that

who you're like huh like i've always

taken care of this person's needs first

like as i usually do and

i could probably test something out with

them and if it didn't work out i'd be

kind of sad about it but like i wouldn't

be devastated

um hmm well i i have a friend in mind

okay great okay and so this is somebody

that how long have you known this friend

ten

ten more than ten years oh wow okay so

ten years yeah um but we're not like

every day friends right yeah but you

guys have been familiar and like

most of the times you're probably taking

care of this friend right how are you

like oh let me give you advice like what

can i bring you you're sick like that

kind of relationship all right so this

experiment is going to be very time

limited it's going to be very specific

so i need you to set like a specific

date and time that you're going to do

this in the next seven days oh okay yeah

it was going to be real specific because

we need to get that data and it's going

to be something that's kind of uh

contained meaning

it should be something where it's not

like a free-for-all like from now on i'm

just going to be you know we're vomit

and always tell them all about my

problems first but it's more about

okay in this particular conversation i'm

going to go with him with the problem

and

once i talk about the problem get his

advice i'm going to be like that was so

helpful thank you goodbye

and not make that about him at all

because that's the other thing where

with your type of poor belief and

assumptions sometimes you'll be like and

how are you and then you spend another

45 minutes dealing with that absolutely

so we're not going to do that this is

literally going to be you going to him

to express a need of yours to express a

problem have this person give you the

advice and then be like thank you that

was super helpful talk to you later

so that's the experiment and i have to

go do that and you have to go do that

and then what are you expecting me to

report back with so first we're going to

predict how you think that's going to go

so based on

your beliefs or maybe your assumptions

and rules like how do you think that

might go like in terms of maybe how you

might feel or what they might feel or do

well

i mean

i think it will go fine okay

do you think that he's gonna have some

kind of inner judgment of you like

kyle selfish

he didn't even ask about me today

um

i mean maybe

i don't know yeah well let's get

specific and do you think that that's a

possibility yes okay yes and you

obviously don't want that to be

anybody's thoughts about you no okay all

right so you're gonna hold you're gonna

hold that distress a little bit for

yourself

and then you said it's gonna probably go

fine meaning like you think you can

carry it through

but it might make you a little

uncomfortable yeah and i'm hoping i

don't slip up and start being like and

how are you and go oh well i'm sorry

that you went through something you know

like and then just complete turn around

yeah yeah exactly okay so we've laid out

a couple of expectations one is well i'm

sure he'll be fine with giving me the

advice but maybe in his mind he'll be

like whoa kyle's being selfish today

like didn't even ask about how i am and

then also you might just feel kind of

like

icky and then you're afraid that you

might like break and just start to like

take care of him so you feel better

about yourself again exactly so those

are the expectations all right so then

you're going to do this experiment so

when do you think you can do something

like this

give me a day okay tomorrow and then

what problem do you think you're going

to bring him um i'll bring him uh uh a

just

i'm so stressed out i'm so busy okay

which is true that's great so you'll

just talk about that and oh my gosh i

need help with this yeah like it's it's

it's on a level that i've never

experienced before okay great that's

perfect and then we'll kind of keep it

time limited so how long do you think

the conversation will be just give us 15

minutes perfect okay and remember we're

not gonna

make it another 20 minutes

okay awesome so then we're going to do

this and

we've already talked about the

expectations

and after you do it i wanna i want you

to do two things one is i want you to

actually ask him

at the end of that conversation

was this okay with you that

today we just talked about me i'm just

really stressed

you literally ask him that very specific

question

because you want to get some level of

feedback of course he can still lie to

you but it at least gives you some

semblance of what he might be thinking

and i don't think he's expecting that

kind of question from you no so he'd be

like hey i gotta run because i'm busy

but just so just so i know like was this

okay that i called you just to get your

advice today and we didn't get to talk

about how you're doing

i can do that okay cool i can totally do

that awesome so then he'll give you some

feedback about that you will write that

down and you will write down just your

feelings leading up to it like was it

that discomforting and then once you get

that feedback from him how did you feel

then

and i will say that what i'm expecting

is this guy's been your friend for 10

years that he's probably gonna be like

dude it's cool like that's what friends

are for something like that and then

using that

experience we're going to now go back to

your

assumptions again and say did that

assumption really hold i mean do you

always have to take care of people or

are there at least certain people in

your life who you can have it back and

forth with

and this is the first step then we do

another experiment with a different

person and a different kind of

experiment so that we can loosen these

assumptions make them more conditional

and that will feed back to that core

belief like is it truly as universal as

you think it is

and that's really going to be the

process so it'll take a few weeks for us

to

execute it all the way through but this

is the first step and i think if you can

do this first step it's going to start

to shake that assumption enough for the

rest of our work

wow

cool right it's really good it's going

to be fun now now i'm like morphing into

kyle kittleson yeah

that do i do i need to be patient

anymore no okay

that is um really good because i was

really committed to the patient role you

know yeah

and i was like where is she going with

this like i'm just talking about how i

don't feel like i'll ever find love and

she wants me to go complain to a friend

yeah you know and so i was like this has

got to come together somehow but it

definitely did yeah yeah and it's really

i mean again it's a process so the core

belief was it was a process to develop

that core belief yeah but the more that

you can design these behavioral

experiments to challenge the specific

assumptions and to realize that those

assumptions don't hold yes

then the core beliefs get shaken because

it's like wait if this assumption

doesn't hold and there are people who

like seem to love me for me even if i'm

being a little negative today or a

little selfish today whatever it is that

i'm labeling this as in my head yeah

what does that mean about me truly being

unlovable am i really unlovable yeah or

is it that i just have to find the right

people to like

yeah yeah yeah and it's such a good

thing to note

or realize

that a core belief

does not mean

necessarily that it is true

it is just your belief hidden way deep

down on the iceberg and it's more like

your fear like dude if this was true

that was nice

i want our youtube viewers i want you to

leave a comment

if you watched the entire session

because it was a little longer than

normal so i want to know who watched

that act that whole session and then if

you feel comfortable enough

i want you to share one of your core

beliefs or or something that you believe

is a core belief um because we all have

them like dr judy said we all have them

but they're they're living down there

unnoticed

and they're affecting every part of our

life yeah and through cbt therapy we can

uncover something that's deep deep deep

within us

and bring light on it right and bring

awareness to it and just that awareness

changes everything absolutely everything

that's what starts everything that's

what starts you on the right path yes if

you got motivated watching this go to

medcircle.com and check out the entire

series on cognitive behavioral therapy

dr judy amazing thank you thank you

thank you thank you that's great i'm

kyle kiddleson remember whatever you're

going through you got this

thanks for watching if you liked what

you just saw then why not subscribe

click right here for new episodes and

new series every week and to access

exclusive mental health videos that we

only release at medcircle.com check out

the links below

[Music]

you


what do you want to do is you look at

six-year-old little you

[Music]

sorry

rescue her mandy from the year 2021 this

is not the time to stay silent this is

not the time to stay small you let those

tears come if they want to come you are

allowed to express yourself

you are allowed to be heard

and she is too

go ahead and say why do you believe

we're unlovable

[Music]

[Music]

nice to meet you mandy thank you so much

for being here today

i would love to start off by learning

more about you and what you would like

to accomplish from today's session

and once i have an understanding of what

you'd like to achieve i'll tell you a

little bit about what you can expect

from hypnotherapy how it works what it

isn't

and then we'll dive into the session

does that sound good that sounds great

um so nice to meet you grace uh thank

you for taking the time today to dig

through this with me

uh

so

i'm not sure how much you want to go

into detail but

i have been through quite a few things

in my life

starting from a very young age

that kind of created some really false

beliefs that i kind of built my life

around

and

have been spending much of my adulthood

trying to unravel that and dig in

i have definitely had you know cognitive

behavior therapy some somatic experience

experiencing some emdr

because there is past trauma

but i still feel stuck like i still feel

like there's blocks

and not really sure how to get through

them

definitely so just to make sure i'm on

the same page there's definitely been

some trauma you've been doing a lot of

work around it but you're still

experiencing blocks and not sure how to

move beyond them

yeah

so let's start with how you would love

to feel

as compared to

how you actually feel day to day

um i would

and it comes in waves so it's not like i

always feel this way but there are many

times where i just feel like i need to

stay small

um

do

things to

you know

make others happy

i definitely was a perfectionist growing

up so like tied my worth to outcome a

lot and performance

and now i know that not to be true i've

done a lot of work around that but it

still really is kind of deep down you

know i'll find myself getting

lost in a project or just extending too

much of myself kind of

maybe subconsciously hoping for

um unconditional love or acceptance or

security that's you know somebody or

something won't leave because there's

been a lot of loss in my life as well

so i definitely feel like those are some

themes that that keep me small or don't

allow me to be fully myself like i'm too

afraid to show that side

if that makes sense

absolutely and so i have a couple

follow-up questions but the first is

what is the opposite

of looking of being small playing small

to you so

in your life what would be a very

tangible

example of

the opposite of staying small

um

being big

being big just being like

unapologetically

you know just myself um not really

worrying about

trying to mold around expectations or

what i believe others are wanting

if if that makes sense so i guess that

would be the opposite of just kind of

being out there

um

yeah i mean i

kind of along this line i like to public

speak right i was a teacher for a long

time i'm used to teaching in front of

people

so that to me is kind of being big but i

would like to see that

feeling or that fearlessness in other

areas

beautiful so that's exactly where i want

us headed i want to know what does

playing big

look like for mandy so

public speaking seems like it's a piece

of that perhaps being on stages is it

having a following do you have a message

is there a business you want to launch

do you want to win an oscar whatever it

is like this is the time to just share

probably the thing that's the most

terrifying to consider but also the

thing that lights you up the most what

are some of those things

yeah okay well

um

i

love to write and i love to illustrate

and i really love connecting

with people through emotion

especially shared emotions so to me

writing is very expressive it is a huge

piece of my soul

um i have created my own website i have

kind of put it out there but afraid to

grow it like i just

kind of put it there and just

let it sit and i let myself get busy

you know too busy to get to this too

busy to get to that and i know

i'm a single mom i'm a very very busy

woman i'm not

like totally used to that if that makes

sense so that's just almost like an

excuse really

um for probably some some fear behind

that

yes

so procrastination can take many forms

right sometimes people think

procrastination is laziness but for

example when i have a book deadline my

house is the cleanest it's ever been

right not being lazy i am just scrubbing

the floors

and so procrastination in all of its

various forms is actually a fear of

failure and so it makes sense that this

thing that calls to you so deeply that

is a part of your soul this writing

that you would become too busy when in

fact you are extremely busy and that's a

very insidious form of the subconscious

going no i'm going to keep you small to

keep you safe i'm going to keep you busy

so busy and actually busy that you don't

have time to look at this thing which

would make you vulnerable yep yep

so the subconscious always wants to keep

us safe and it typically does so by

attempting to keep us small

if you had to guess and there could be

another subconscious reason for it you

mentioned there's been a lot of loss in

your life there's been trauma

if you had to guess the source of the

fear of playing big the source of the

thing that's blocking you from writing

is there one thing in particular that

comes to mind that you feel comfortable

sharing

um there there are a few that i think

just kind of wove together over the

years um

i had some um

childhood um

sexual abuse that had happened very

young and you know persisted for many

years and just going through that kind

of always feeling always

not not allowed to say anything right so

just stay small just stay small do what

you have to do

to to make that person happy

don't draw attention to yourself

don't share your feelings keep it all

stuffed down and then i think to um you

know i love my family tremendously but

being

the oldest you know of your siblings you

feel great at first and you know you're

kind of doing your thing you're very

independent and then the others come

along and you love that but and now

being a parent of three myself you

realize how busy you get with each of

them and it doesn't mean you don't care

about them or love them any less or or

anything like that but um

but but it was a shift and it was you

know attention was diverted elsewhere

and if i was like trying to do something

or if i excelled at something

there was

encouragement of it but also

don't show off don't make other people

feel bad don't do this don't do you know

just kind of sit quiet sit pretty you

know do your thing we want you to be

yourself we love you

but you know tone it down

yeah if that makes sense so i think the

combination of those events just

yeah kind of built that in me absolutely

is so it feels as though there's a

correlation between staying silent

staying small

and you had mentioned that shared

emotion is so important to you

yeah can come together and have a shared

experience around their emotions and in

each one of these cases you had to

tamper down

how you were feeling and your expression

whether it was the fact that you were

excelling at something or the fact that

somebody was

causing you harm yeah so what we want to

do is find that shared link in your

subconscious

and set you free

in in all of these various ways and so

that means finding your voice and

feeling not just the safety to share

your voice there's a element of that but

also just the courage to do it even when

it's scary

yeah because even when all conditions

are perfect it can be scary

yeah and so we want to make sure that

we're boosting courage as well go ahead

so i love that um i was just gonna say i

don't know if this will make sense at

all but i have

i have no problem

saying what i need to say

for others

if that makes sense um i i have spent a

ton of time in advocacy service work all

of that i will voice whatever i need to

say i will stand my ground set you know

harden the truth but when it comes to my

own it's like

so that might be another layer that's

also impacting it so absolutely

absolutely

so what you don't need this particular

element but i i do feel called to share

it and to see what it brings up for you

because public speaking is a part of

your skill set which is something that

many people fear worse than death right

there's been studies that show people

are more afraid of speaking in public

than they are of dying

and the fact that you can do that with

ease is tremendous so when i'm helping

people overcome a fear of public

speaking in particular women one of the

things that most consistently has made

an impact is when a woman can imagine at

the subconscious level all of the women

who have been silenced throughout

history and even the women who are

currently silent that there are parts of

the world in you know 2021 today where

if a woman were to get on stage and

share her truth she would be stoned to

death or thrown in jail

and that when you get up and share

whether it's at a quarterly board

meeting about the numbers or whether

it's about the thing that you care the

most about changing in the world

you're standing up for yourself you're

sharing your voice and your truth but

you're also representing all those

silenced women and the fact that they'll

never get to do that in this lifetime

it's an honor it's a privilege and it's

a responsibility and we focus on that

for half a second and all the women are

like get me on the stage

so it's we want to be able to channel

that for little mandy

yeah

you know that that she has the chance to

be set free that she has the chance to

heal from the trauma that was inflicted

upon her that she doesn't have to be a

victim any longer

and she can do that for herself

but

she can also do that for other children

or she can do it for puppies who are at

the pound we want it to be important to

little mandy believe it or not it's more

important that we get her

buy-in and that she's excited to

transform and we'll do that in the

session um but in the same way because

you're already a natural advocate we can

use that as leverage in the subconscious

that like okay i'm doing this for myself

but i'm also doing it

on behalf of something i really care

about who will never have the chance to

do this does that resonate i love it the

second you said doing it for all the

other women or anybody that stayed

silent i got goosebumps i'm like okay

that's perfect i can do that good

perfect okay great so as long as little

mandy agrees we'll go that route

otherwise she'll pick the thing that she

wants to stand up for and we'll run with

that that's perfect

okay great so

would

success look like

feeling more confident in your skin

writing a book

expressing your needs more what's a

tangible outcome that if a week from now

you saw yourself doing it you would go i

have to call grace and tell her this is

happening

um oh my goodness there's i have a whole

list but um

one thing definitely i think just

being

being published first would be like my

biggest thing um that would be a

signpost because it's the one thing i'm

like that i'm

constantly stalling on

and from there it's like i i know

exactly what i want to do you know with

like expanding nonprofit organization

just doing lots of other things to help

people

um and and i have that association too

like if i'm a writer i can't also teach

i can't also still stay in like the

nonprofit world and help out like i have

completely compartmentalized these

things and there's tons of people that

do all that kind of stuff yes but

that's another so that would be my first

step yes perfect for the subconscious to

say oh you care about all these other

things you're gonna have to say goodbye

to them forever if you do the thing that

your soul is most calling for you to do

which is to finish your book and be

published

so

you said that you love to illustrate as

well is this a a children's book or is

this a novel is it so i have three three

so one would be a self-help book because

i have like a whole program lined out

for that

um poetry

and children's books

they're all and all geared towards

healing

what's your main signpost

uh little chicky marie it's it's a

children's book perfect

and are you cool with published via

amazon on your own or does it have to be

with publisher okay perfect so

originally i wanted to do publisher but

then i was like no you know what it's

it's just about getting that first step

and making momentum and the publisher

can cut you know

the traditional way can come later if if

so and if not you know it's all good

perfect i love that that takes out a

huge

barrier that is 18 months at a minimum

in the making and i'll share a dear

friend of mine who's also a client john

strollecki he wrote cafe on the edge of

the world

and uh it sold six million copies and

he's self-published and he was turned

down by 200 publishers six million

copies

cafe on the edge of the earth or cafe in

the edge of the world either one but

it's phenomenal either way whether it's

world or earth and um yeah so he would

he would say this is the way to go and

once you sell your hundreds of thousands

of copies then a publisher is going to

buy it for a lot more so that's very

exciting so little chickie marie

published via amazon self-published

that's your signpost that you've broken

free

is that right yeah yep awesome okay

we're gonna take a beautiful winding

road to get there but that's the

signpost that's the goal so

any questions or anything else you want

to add before i tell you a little bit

about what you can expect from hypnosis

no

um

no i think this this will be really good

because it's definitely impacted other

areas of my life from motherhood to

dating to all of that so

yeah so i'm excited i'm excited for it

absolutely i mean

the subconscious is just a bunch of

roots that are intertwined and we can't

even really know the subconscious

associations we've made but one of the

cool things is even though we're going

to work on you becoming a published

author and healing some childhood trauma

in order to

feel safe enough and courageous enough

to be seen in that way

you might find you get the best

sleep of your life tonight or you might

find that you know whatever else is

going on if there's a i don't even want

to make suggestions but i'll give you an

example i had a client who called me a

couple days ago and he went grace i

didn't even tell you this but i've been

a smoker for 25 years

and we haven't worked on quitting

smoking but ever since we had our first

session three weeks ago i haven't had a

cigarette so what was that all a bonus

miracle right because he started

elevating his self-confidence his

self-worth his love of himself and and

his confidence the things that were

self-harm

but shrouded in a light of

stress relief yep we're unnecessary so

be on the lookout for bonus miracles

they could be anything

i love that that sounds like a little

bit of fun and magic and whimsy so let's

do it

perfect okay so you've done cbt emdr but

never hypnotherapy

no

no

all right so now i'm going to share with

you a little bit about what hypnosis is

how it works why it works what it's not

and that will just help you to get even

more out of the session because we'll

know that your expectations are in

alignment with reality and not what

hollywood portrays so you mentioned

early on you've done cbt cognitive

behavioral therapy emdr uh but not

hypnotherapy correct

i have um

done a little bit i do have your app and

um i love it actually one of um

in the beginning i love i can go now

like right to

down the staircase right to where i want

to be i know exactly what it looks like

and it's become a favorite meditation

you know escape for me as well so i have

some experience but

not um you know the reciprocated

one-on-one experience so

fabulous well thank you i'm honored and

for everyone listening you can get the

app at getgraves.com forward slash med

circle

you will love

it so just as you said i call hypnosis

meditation with a goal

and when you're listening to a hypnosis

recording it feels very similar to any

meditation recording the slight

difference being that it's if it's

hypnotherapy then that person has

specifically studied how to reprogram

the subconscious mind whereas if it's a

meditation from a meditation app it

could be just someone who likes to relax

and thinks they know how to make a

recording which is fine and you know

there's great intention behind that but

it's not going to be anywhere near as

effective as someone who studied how to

specifically weed out what's not serving

you plant what you desire water it let

it grow and then future pace you into

the life of your dreams so that's the

distinction between recordings of

meditation and hypnosis they feel the

same it's more about the credentials of

the person making them

and then when it comes to what we're

going to do today one-on-one

hypnotherapy

it the the name hypnotherapy is a little

bit of a

conundrum because we're not licensed

mental health practitioners we're not

therapists we're not psychologists we're

not psychiatrists we don't diagnose we

don't treat disorders that's what all of

the other brilliant genius doctors on

med circle are for

uh what i really am is an expert in the

subconscious mind and so the way i kind

of view my role in the world is it's as

if i say okay mandy let's go i take your

hand and i've got a lantern i press the

button i take you down into your

subconscious and i know what happens if

we go left i know what happens if we go

right but i'm holding up the light and

saying what would you like to do where

would you like to go what empowers you

most and so you're the one making all

the change you're the one doing all of

the healing i'm just your guide and then

i bring you back up through your

elevator and your life is phenomenally

better than it was before we went down

and from a scientific perspective

here's why

so most of us attempt to change our

lives when we're completely stressed out

if we were to put sensors on our head

and read an eeg machine we would see

what's known as the beta brainwave state

when we're in normal waking

consciousness so you and i having this

conversation we're in beta the waves

we're producing would look like this so

spiky fast put together

that's fight flight freeze survival mode

that's where stress comes in it's where

we are our least able to take in new

information it is our least adaptive

state and it's usually when we attempt

to change our lives which is why it's so

difficult to stop eating the chocolate

or go to bed earlier quit smoking or do

any of the things when we're in the

shower for example and we're a little

bit more relaxed the negative ions from

the running water the fact that we're

doing something rote like washing our

hair

we're able to drop down into what's

called the alpha brainwave state which

looks like this on the eeg which is

daydreaming and when we're daydreaming

sometimes we get those light bulb

flashes of inspiration so our intuition

can speak to us because we're a little

bit more relaxed

and then way down here where things

barely move is the delta brainwave state

that's sleep so when we're asleep we are

unconscious

we're not aware of the fact that we're

in our bed right if there were a moth

flying around we wouldn't know

but our subconscious is alive and well

during the rem cycle of sleep when we're

dreaming so movies make it look like

hypnosis takes place in delta it makes

it look like it's happening when we're

asleep that is just hollywood wanting us

to have a reason to believe why a

character who would not behave a certain

way is behaving that way it's that's all

it is the truth of what hypnosis is is

we drop down into what's known as the

theta brainwave state so it's deeper

than alpha it's deeper than daydreaming

but it's more alert and conscious than

sleep so the theta brainwave state is

where you can connect 100 to your

intuition

to your inspiration

and where that critical factor of the

mind that goes i could never do that

that's stupid i'm scared a million

people have done that before everyone

will make fun of me all that critical

factor of the brain

is

off in the corner not paying attention

and we can finally dream big

so a study found that 600 sessions of

psychotherapy on average resulted in 38

improvement over the course of 600

sessions

so

that's beta that's when we're talking

about our problems from the conscious

mind and that's wonderful 38 improvement

is a huge amount of improvement that's

about 10 years of talk therapy which is

awesome and again there are very

specific reasons to do that that a

hypnotherapist can't help you with right

we can't treat disorders we can't

diagnose so awesome perfect love it we

work together great

same study found that six sessions of

hypnotherapy results in an average of 93

percent improvement

and that's because we're doing it from

theta where there's no critical factor

of the mind telling us it's impossible

and where we have the surplus energy

required to create new connections in

the brain very quickly so dendrites

extend out from the neurons and connect

and make new neural pathways

that much faster it's it's like

lightning speed so that's what we're

going to do there's a whole lot more

about why hypnosis isn't mind control

and all of these things that i've talked

about in other med circle videos so i'm

sure

anybody who wants to know more can find

those but i feel like that's enough for

you to understand

why you're going to be aware that you're

sitting in your home why you're not

asleep why

you are conscious and alert but still

deeply relaxed so any questions

no

okay

ready to dive in

[Music]

all right mandy very good so without

further ado go ahead and close your eyes

take a nice

deep

letting go breath

already beginning to relax both mind and

body

relax the top of your head

relax your forehead

smoothing out any creases

relax the tiny muscles next to your eyes

relax your jaw letting it hang loose and

slap

relax your shoulders

relax your arms all the way through to

the fingertips

relax your torso breathing easily really

releasing your stomach

relax your legs all the way out through

the bottoms of your feet

now not now but in just a moment i'll

ask you to open your eyes and look up at

the ceiling

and then when i ask you to close your

eyes you'll easily and effortlessly

send a wave of relaxation through your

body so very quickly

to relax 10

times

deeper

opening your eyes looking up at the

ceiling

all the way down now 10

times

deeper good job

excellent we're gonna do that twice more

opening your eyes looking up at the

ceiling

all the way down now 10

times deeper

excellent work

you realize now your eyelids are so

wonderfully deeply relaxed they just

want to stay closed

no matter how hard you try to open them

they just want to stay close

when you're absolutely certain your eyes

just don't want to open and it's all

right you can give it a good try

you're certain they just don't want to

open go ahead and say a color you love

out loud

green

green imagining green

green flowing in through the top of your

head

all the way through your body

out the bottoms of your feet

down into the center of the earth

green relaxing you

green releasing you

green taking you all the way down

one last time now opening your eyes

looking up at the ceiling

all the way down now ten

times

deeper

and

green

imagining green

plowing in through the top of your head

all the way through your body

out the bottoms of your feet

down into the center of the

earth repeating out loud after me

i am safe

i am safe

i am calm

i am calm

i choose to be here

i choose to be here

got another nice deep letting go breath

you're doing so well we'll do that twice

more i am safe

i am safe

i am calm

i am calm

i choose to be here

i choose to be here

one more nice deep letting go abroad

i am safe

i am safe

i am calm i am calm

i choose to be here

i choose to be here

okay now go ahead and begin to imagine

you're

perfect staircase forming before you

it might be one you've seen before or it

might be brand new

so long as it's your perfect

staircase

you're doing it right

it could be sleek and simple or

elaborate and ornate

whatever you notice is perfect and

correct really good

and this perfect staircase is going to

lead to your safe

place

a place where you feel so wonderfully

deeply relaxed and perfectly safe that

lasting transformation to your

subconscious mind takes place

it could be a beach

garden a mountain top

a penthouse a yacht another planet which

is to say it can be anywhere

so long as when you get there

you feel perfectly wonderfully deeply

relaxed and safe

when you're ready the sound of your own

voice taking you even deeper describe

for me in just a few words

what your perfect

staircase is like

it is old cobblestone

it is old cobblestone that's right what

else

it's cool on the bare feet

it's cool on your bigger feet that's

right what else

and it opens to a beautiful enchanted

forest

yes it opens to a beautiful enchanted

forest

so when you're ready to go and head down

those steps into your safe enchanted

forest

you'll let me know by saying out loud

i'm here

it's perfect and i'm ready

i'm here

it's perfect and i'm ready

that's exactly right

you're here

it's perfect

and you're ready

taking your first step down on your

perfect staircase now

ten taking your first step down doubling

your relaxation

nine another step down the deeper you go

the better you feel

eight relaxing releasing and letting go

all the way down now

seven feeling into the velvety darkness

behind your eyelids

six keep going almost there now

five

four

really let go you're doing so well three

two

and

one be there now inside your safe

enchanted forest

start with a number of nice deep

inhalations

breathing in the pleasant fragrances the

pleasant smells they're inside your safe

place

reach out and touch something there

inside your safe

enchanted forest

feeling its texture or its weight its

roughness or smoothness

and now reach out and touch something

else there that it's a very different

texture

good hear the sounds inside you're safe

enchanted for us

notice the colors inside your safe

enchanted forest

perhaps there's even something

nutritious and delicious for you to

taste there inside your safe

enchanted forest even if it's just a sip

of cool clean clear water you can go

ahead and taste that now

and then when you're ready the sound of

your own voice is taking you even deeper

go ahead and describe for me

what stands out to you most about your

safe

enchanted forest

there are lots of animals there

that's right there's lots of animals

there what kind of animals

um

baby deer

lots of birds

uh raccoons squirrels

they're all just hanging out

beautiful

baby deer

lots of birds raccoons squirrels

they're all just hanging out

that's right

how does it feel emotionally to be there

inside your enchanted forest with all of

these animal

space and peaceful and

joyful

safe and peaceful and joyful

amplify and magnify how safe you feel

amplify and magnify how peaceful you

feel

amplify and magnify how joyful you feel

and allow

that joy

to flood your system

the visual i get is like this happy

joyful

acidic rain believe it or not because it

breaks down and dissolves and melts away

all of the calcified pain does that

resonate

yes

so really amplify magnify that joy

and allow it to just pour all over your

body your mind your emotions your energy

amplify magnify that joy and it just

completely dissolves all of the

calcified pain that it touches

and you feel lighter and lighter and

lighter more and more free

take your time now while i'm silent to

allow this joy to work its magic

and share with me once you know you're

complete

i feel complete

that's right you feel complete

and what was that experience like as the

joy

is amplified and magnified

it felt so loving

it felt so loving

and is this a sensation that you feel

with regularity or is it rare or

something else

no

i don't feel it regularly

yeah that's right

in the past you didn't feel it regularly

but now you know that you can come here

to your safe place it's just down the

cobblestone stairs

surrounded by these animals

and you can fill up on joy and feel that

love

whenever you'd like

how does it feel to know that you can

access it this easily

wonderful

wonderful

when you are worthy and deserving

of having that wonderful experience as

often as you'd like

so now go ahead and see feel and

experience that somewhere there inside

your enchanted forest

is a circle of animals

waiting to be read to

and they want to hear their favorite

book little chicky

marie so find that circle of animals

ready to be read to

find published beautiful little chicky

marie

and when you hold that book in your

hands you can see that the spine

has been opened

thousands of times

it's their favorite book

take your time and read it to your

animal friends your published children's

book

take all the time you need and describe

for me which you notice when you're

ready

they are happy to hear it

because it

makes them hurt less and smile

yes they're happy to hear it

because it makes them hurt less and they

smile

and in this situation what's the

opposite of hurting less what does it

make them feel more of

peace and joy

yes

so your book

helps your readers

feel more peace and joy

is that right yes

beautiful

so i'd like for you to notice that

there's another group of animals maybe

they're teenagers if it was the little

kid animals who were just listening

now you're gonna find the next circle

the circle of teenagers and as much as

they love little chicky marie and they

do

they want to hear from you

the journey

that it took

for you

to write it

to publish it

and most importantly to overcome

the blockages that stood

in the way

but before you can share with that

circle that story

you'll have to remove the blockage

so we're going to go on a journey

together

on a voyage on an adventure

to discover what the blockage or

blockages are

so that you can summon the courage

to destroy them

to overcome them to remove them

and to be victorious

you already know it's done in one realm

now it's just a matter of connecting the

dots

take all the time you need and when

you're ready to begin this journey

let me know by saying i'm ready

i'm ready

that's right

you are

ready

so when i count down from three to one

and snap my

fingers someone or something is going to

appear as the personification of the

fear that's stopped you from writing

little chicky marie the first of your

many books

the personification of the fear that's

been stopping you

it might stem from an experience in

childhood

it might be from something someone told

you

when you were a kid

it could be absolutely anything from any

direction of time or space

the personification of the fear that's

been stopping you from writing your

truth

the fear that's been keeping you silent

and small

but remember

this is your enchanted forest you're the

boss you call the shots

so whenever this thing appears if you

want you can immediately put it in a

bubble so that it can't touch you or

talk to you or get close to you

you're the boss

three going even deeper getting ready to

experience the personification of this

fear before you

two it could appear as a boulder or a

witch or a frog or a blue dot which is

to say however it appears is perfect and

correct

and one

see feel and experience the

personification of the fear before you

notice what you notice and describe for

me what that is when you're ready

it's the grim reaper

that's right

it's the grim reaper

and he's just standing there and he's

very stoic and quiet and not budging

that's right it's the grim reaper he's

just standing there and he's very stoic

and quiet

and he's not

budging

that's right

how do you feel observing this grim

reaper standing before you

when he first appeared he

just said

you are unlovable

and

then he got quiet

and it hurt really bad

to hear that

but as i'm staring at him

he just looks like a statue

yes

when he first appeared he said you are

unlovable

and then he got quiet and it really hurt

but now as you look at him he just looks

like a statue

when i count down from three to one and

snap my fingers the voice that you heard

that message from you are unlovable will

ring loud and clear and you'll tell me

who it is three going even deeper even

if it was yourself too or it could be

anyone or anything

one

it's myself

it's yourself

that's right

go ahead and repeat out loud after me

and you can change any of my words to

make them perfect for you

and say grim reaper

are you

me

grim reaper are you me

yeah

say

why did you dress up like that

why did you dress up like that

i didn't want you to recognize who i was

i didn't want you to recognize who i was

go ahead and say why do you believe

we're unlovable

why do you believe we're unlovable

because that's all we've experienced so

far

because it's all we've experienced thus

far

what do you feel called to do as you

look at this

statuesque grim reaper who dressed up in

this halloween costume just to try to

trick you and you got to the root of it

in one second

what do you feel called to do if

anything

hug him

yes hug him

pour love into him pour love into this

personification of your deepest fear

about yourself

and let me know what happens next

he turned to an angel and and then to

little mandy

turned into an angel

and then to little mandy

to little you that's exactly right how

does little mandy appear

relieved

she's relieved

and how old is little mandy appearing to

you there

six

yeah she's six

that's exactly right

what do you want to do is you look at

six-year-old little you

sorry

[Music]

rescue her yes you want to rescue her

mandy from the year 2021 this is not the

time to stay silent this is not the time

to stay small you let those tears come

if they want to come you express your

emotions that shared emotion that you

have with little mandy that only she can

understand the depth

of those emotions the way that you can

you are allowed to express yourself

you are allowed to be

heard and she is too

you're doing so well

and now you want to rescue her

so when i count down from three to one

and snap my fingers you're going to do

just that a scenario will play out and

you will rescue little you

you will be the hero you will save the

day you as an author have the

opportunity to rewrite your own history

right now in this moment

gather your courage

three going even deeper

gather your strength to trusting what

comes

and one

rescue little mandy now

take all the time you need rescuing

little you

and when you're complete you'll let me

know by placing both hands over your

heart

beautiful really really good

and you can choose to share

what you just did out loud if you'd like

if it feels like the most empowering

choice or if the most empowering choice

feels like to keep that sacred

you can keep it to yourself

what feels most powerful to you in this

moment

to share it

beautiful how did you rescue little

mandy

i just picked her up and held her close

and she was scared

but also felt very safe

and then i brought her to the animals

[Music]

that's right you picked her up and you

held her close even though she was

scared

she also felt safe

and then you brought her to the animals

and i was able to see that

i've chosen to stay small to protect

myself

because i didn't want to experience any

more potential pain

that's right

you were able to see that you kept

yourself small to try to protect

yourself from any more potential pain

and what do you know to be true now

it's safe to be mean

it's safe to be you

go ahead and repeat

five times out loud as you imagine

well you can say five times out loud or

10 or 15 however many you need to get to

the end

while you imagine writing your

manuscript

with little mandy's help of course

as your consultant

publishing printing having the first

edition of your book arrive at your home

holding that book hearing the sound as

you open it for the first time running

your hands over the pages

smelling the fresh book smell

repeat over and over and over again it's

safe to be me

as you write and publish your book

beginning now

it's safe to be me

it's safe to be me

it's safe to be me

it's safe to be me

it's safe to be me

it's safe

to be me

it's safe

to be me

that's right

it's safe to be you

now go ahead and take little mandy's

hand

and find that group of teenage animals

all waiting to hear your triumphant

publishing story and the journey you

went through to break down

that old personification of that old

fear because underneath the grim reaper

was a beautiful angel and a child who

just wanted to be held and loved

share the story of your journey and your

triumph

as you pass out fresh copies

of your book to everyone in that circle

well taking all the time you need and

sharing what that was like when you're

ready

it was fun

i i used to teach high school so i

enjoyed teenagers

and

they all wanted to know how they could

do that process themselves like busting

through their own fear

to pursue their dream

and that was

wonderful to be able to share that

yes

authentically

yes

they all wanted to know how to bust

through their fears

and share their dreams and it felt so

good and was so fun for you to be able

to share

how you did that authentically

beautiful job really good

excellent

so now we're going to have you imagine

one more thing

you're going to imagine into the future

when you're writing your books

and when

little mandy gets a little scared and

you can feel that she's starting to dig

out her old grim reaper costume she's

looking for it but she doesn't need it

all she needs is a hug

all she needs to remember and to hear is

that she's lovable

and all she needs to hear and be

reminded of is that it's safe to be her

so right before publication day right

before going on stages to talk about

your book in those moments where she

needs an extra boost

you're going to close your eyes

you're going to imagine that color you

love

you're going to give little mandy a hug

you're going to say

i know you're lovable because i love you

and it's safe to be you

and then you're gonna get back to work

envision doing that over and over and

over again until you know you've got it

close your eyes

you say green or whatever color is

coming to you that day you give little

mandy a hug

tell her i know you're lovable because i

love you

it's safe to be you

and then you get back to work

do that now until

you've seared it into your body mind and

spirit

beautiful

how do you feel now

really relaxed

and

um

light free

yes you feel really relaxed

light

and

free

every day in every way

your courage increases more and more

every day in every way you remember your

books

help your readers to feel peace

and joy

every day in every way you feel more and

more lovable because every day you

remind little mandy how much you love

her

and that reverberates throughout time

and space and then you get to receive

that self-love proclamation in the

present moment

so you pour love into little mandy as

often as you can

receiving that love

and channeling it into your work

it is safe for you to share your truth

you amplify and magnify your courage to

do so

staying small

in order to stay safe

is an old outdated unhelpful mechanism

from the past

you blow it a kiss goodbye

and keep marching forward

perfect

into the life of your dreams

excellent top

if there's anything else you'd like to

say to your animal friends to little

mandy go ahead and do that now

when you're feeling complete and ready

to come back you'll say out loud i did

it

i'm so proud of myself

i'm ready to come back now

i'm ready to come back now

perfect

go ahead and say the whole phrase

i did it

i'm so proud of myself

i'm ready to come back now

i did it

i'm so proud of myself

and i'm ready to come back now

that's exactly right

you did it

you're so proud of yourself

and you're ready to come back now

one moving your feet in your toes

two moving your hands and your fingers

three lots of energy returning to your

body

four coming back to this place this time

five remembering everything six feeling

proud of yourself seven filled with love

for yourself eight feeling great

nine getting ready to open your eyes and

ten

[Music]

opening your eyes returning back

wipe the eyes

thank you

oh my goodness beautiful job my absolute

pleasure

thank you

that was an ugly block grace literally

an ugly block

wow the grim reaper did that surprise

you yes

like but it to me it was like symbolize

the the my own

block being the death of my dreams

sorry

yes it's perfect isn't that amazing the

wisdom of the subconscious yes you

didn't consciously choose that

this image pops up that literally

represents the death

of your dreams and there's little mandy

hiding underneath these cloaks

um yeah yes like

knock knock let me out

amazing so i have a couple questions for

you and then i'm just gonna let you bask

in the glory of your transformation

because

as powerful as the hypnotherapy session

is

it's it's really kind of well there's a

couple ways you can think about it you

could think about it as tonight we

planted seeds

and over the next couple of days they're

going to grow roots and sprout through

the ground and you're going to really

start to enjoy the benefits of the

session when the right when the fruit

blooms when the flowers bloom

in in a couple of days

but another way to think about it is we

went on a journey today now like if we

were in a car we went from point a to

point c

now begins the time where you get to get

out of the car and enjoy the destination

so first let's talk about the fact that

this was your first one-on-one session

how is this different from

the recordings if at all

um

i well i first i love the recordings

because you know you're being guided but

um

i felt like

you definitely could feel my energy and

kind of knew where to drive it

um if that makes sense or like just

maybe even the responses i was having um

it could be more directional in that

which

um

i felt like really got to the root of

things much quicker

um

yeah not that i haven't had that

experience uh on the app before but this

was on a whole new level so i loved it

yeah an app can't go that's right it's

yeah one staircase that's cool to the

touch yes

you can't go deeper into your personal

experience so powerful but generic

whereas this is completely your world

it's all your subconscious amazing so

speaking of your stone staircase is that

the staircase you typically see or was

that yes

no it's it's my tried and true i just

love it

kind of like a whimsy nerd so like i

just like that stuff um

yeah and it just it just feels natural

and very homey and

grounding so

yeah

so for the viewers at home they might

notice that at that point your eyelids

started fluttering a little bit

which is what happens in emdr right

rapid eye movement or in the rem stage

of sleep and that's an indication that

we're entering into the theta brainwave

state it's a sign of synabolism so i do

that so much every time i do hypnosis

myself when i'm the client or i'm

listening to a recording but it's it's

interesting when other people don't yes

that's a great sign

that's good that you said then i'm so

funny that the video picked it up but um

even when i'm meditating just normally

like i will get to that eye flutter i

made my own kid one time with my

daughter she was like

mom what are your eyes doing i'm like

it's it's normal honey it's normal

normal it's rem sleep cycle kind of it's

perfect

and not everybody experiences that but

those who do is perfectly normal and

natural

so today when you went to your enchanted

forest was it similar to what it was

like in the past or did anything new

stand out to you

oh i can't hear you i think i'm sorry

yeah there was a lot a lot more animals

this time

uh i think animals for me

as a kid that's kind of um

where i would escape to was anywhere in

nature or with animals because i felt at

peace and unconditionally loved and i

feel like that's what i was clearly

needing

at the bottom of my staircase today so

wow

again amazing how the subconscious gives

you exactly what you need without a

directive you didn't go i need to feel

unconditionally loved i equate

unconditional love with animals so let's

go let's face it

you just show up and it's bambi and it's

like yeah it was

and like the first thing i did was give

the little baby dear kiss like

i feel like i was in a disney movie

exactly i was right there with you i

loved everything but that's my happy

place too

so

the next thing we did is i had you

imagine the circle of animals reading

your first children's book now normally

if we had more time we did have a little

bit of a time crunch in creating this

video

i would have asked what do you want to

do what do you notice what happens next

and we would have gone down that path

and that's wonderful when it's

completely client directed but i've done

so many thousands and thousands and

thousands and thousands of sessions at

this point

for any of my students who are in my

school listening who are beginners we

don't do this but once you've got i mean

you know over 10 000 hours of practice

you can start to sense what might be a

really powerful

place to shine the lantern right but i

always ask does that resonate is it this

or is it something else so that you have

the opportunity to rewrite it as we go

along if it doesn't fit or make sense so

even if i offer a suggestion i always

leave an opportunity for you to redirect

if it doesn't fit but your face lit up

when i said there was a circle of little

animals ready to hear your story so what

was that like for you what did you feel

and what did you experience reading it

to them um

i know this sounds so weird but because

they like unconditionally love me like i

i wanted to give back that my version of

love

which is

really trying to help ease the pain and

suffering of others so bringing joy

bringing hope bringing um

information kindness whatever it is just

sharing that

with

those who are very reciprocative to me

because i will i want to share that with

anybody but it was especially rewarding

getting to share with these animals that

clearly unconditionally love me

so because they're animals they they're

great at that

amazing and the subconscious can't tell

the difference between what's real and

what's imagined so if we want to create

this powerful feedback loop where you're

receiving unconditional love and

therefore your cup is full and you're

ready to pour back out the peace and the

love and the joy and all the things that

come from your writing

we don't have to wait to actually get

that externally from the outside world

from other people who are in pain

we can just go internally and imagine

our animals filling up our cup and it's

it's actually happening as far as the

subconscious is concerned

that's so cool

that's so cool it's so cool it's so

powerful you can do it every day and

you'll have this recording obviously of

this video so you can come back and just

listen along

uh a couple more questions so

what was it like when you started crying

there was a moment where

you became overwhelmed with emotion

what was that like for you what was that

experience like through um

it just

it was like an epiphany that hit me of

of why

why i stay small why i feel my time i

mean life is just busy as it is we're

all busy but like

it's excessive and

you know definitely talking about

procrastination earlier on it just hit

me like that like duh like this is

exactly

why i'm doing that and it was because i

interrupted one second yeah awesome i'm

going to lovingly ask you to put that in

the past tense so why i used to play

small what i used to procrastinate

you're doing perfect keep going yes why

i love that and i love that you caught

that and are correcting me because

that's

how on autopilot it is right

um

so it was it was just very clear

epiphany moment and i didn't

a lot of the stuff that i went through

you know when i was young and then you

know

having cancer and an autoimmune issue

and you know divorce and bankruptcy and

i mean infidelity like all of it that

was that was

decades of

pain and i worked through it i got

through what i needed to but it was like

i don't who wants to experience any more

of that even though you know you can get

through it

but you don't necessarily want to and

and

by me putting myself out there it was

almost like

i was afraid i was i would bring on the

own pain myself if that makes sense

um and that's why i kind of like no just

stay small do you know that's the way to

keep you the safest

and an idol but it's

so dissatisfying staying in that stuck

mode when you know you're capable of so

much more

and and you are you do make

achievements and accomplishments in ways

and you are fulfilled in other ways but

there's still

just

dissatisfaction like discontentment

because something else feels like it's

controlling your life on the inside so

it just all came full circle in that

moment

and with this didn't come up in the

session if we were to do a second

session i'd probably start here

but uh this is something you can do on

your own by just going into

self-hypnosis and sort of clarifying

with your subconscious like hey all

those years you had me playing small all

that crap happened anyway

totally save me from anything buddy

that's the funny thing like we life is

life right we can't control any of it

and so it's so funny how we try and

convince ourselves that oh if we just

keep doing this or we do that we'll be

fine but that's not

that's not the case

you know when people start doing

hypnosis and they feel so much better

it doesn't stop hurricanes from

happening right the external world

continues throwing stuff at us

constantly but by doing hypnosis and

weeding out the things that don't serve

us and cultivating courage and all those

things internally we just deal with the

external things phenomenally better and

we start to live a life by design rather

than a life by default

which is so powerful and interestingly

enough little mandy didn't even need to

go to the place where she was doing this

to save other people or other kids right

the thing we talked about on the front

end and that's why like conscious

conversations are great but the

subconscious knows what it needs she

needed a hug

that's how she

needed you to is her and take her to be

with the animals she needed to know she

was lovable and she's obviously loved

you love her

yeah yeah i did and so your conscious

mind can think about all the children

and all the women and all the things

that's a great thing to kick us into

gear little mandy just needed a hug

yeah yeah

so so simple oh pure

yep

yep

so how do you feel now when you think

about writing little chicky marie

oh it's it's it's it's exciting it's i i

love it i'm like ready to work on it

tonight

how did you feel before we started if i

was like oh you need to work on little

chicky marie tonight just avoiding it

it's written it's edited it's just

i

haven't illustrated it yet

and that you know that's my excuse i

don't have time to sit in and paint you

know i don't have time to sit and

do this you know

and then it's like oh then maybe i'll

just hire an illustrator just to get it

out there and just excuse after excuse

so

this is like no like just make the time

for it like

you're pretty good at

figuring it all out anyways like you've

got this

as kyle would say yes okay you've got

this you got this we love you guys

so when you sit down to illustrate

tonight which will be the greatest gift

you can gift yourself we're doing this

pretty late at night and still carving

out the time to do some illustrating

tonight imagine little mandy's next to

you she's got her colored pencils too or

her crayons or her markers or whatever

and you're allowing her to express

herself as well

and then send me a text of what you've

done i'm so excited to celebrate with

you oh i love that thank you

well beautiful job you know i hope

everybody watching really and i think

that they will gets the sense that when

you go into theta where that critical

mind is gone

and you're connected to your intuition

and your inspiration you're able to

overcome a lifelong

challenge rapidly and of course the

proof is in the pudding and it's an

average of six sessions to see 93

improvement but it's only an average of

six i feel like you made way more than

15 to 20 improvement tonight if you had

to give it a percentage of leap forward

what would what number would you give it

i'd probably say like at least at least

30. like i feel like there was a good

like just that epiphany moment where i

was like oh

oh like that that did a lot for me and

so if that if it was a leap of 30

forward that's another two three

sessions max to get a hundred percent of

the way there and your life has forever

changed it's it's so powerful so thank

you for being so vulnerable

for

sharing yourself and your story and your

journey with me and with everybody

watching tonight it's it's been an honor

to be your guide

in the enchanted forest see it was

fitting

yes oh thank you so much for walking me

through all that and for showing

everybody um how interactive and easy it

really is uh to see some some pretty

cool things uh even if it's not the grim

reaper they'll probably have a really

cool experience

as cool and as perfect as that one

well for everybody watching if you are

interested in checking out hypnotherapy

yourself again you can go to

getgrace.com forward slash med circle

and download our app or work with one of

our grace method hypnotherapists

so thank you again and have a beautiful

night and we can't wait to all read your

books they're going to be fabulous

thank you you said joy for everyone

thank you

bye

bye

thanks for watching check out the links

below for more information on how to

access this full series and subscribe to

our youtube channel to watch new mental

health videos every week did you like

what you heard in this video if you want

to ask a med circle doctor a question

directly you can learn how by visiting

the links in the description below

[Music]

you


[Music]

encina is living with dissociative

identity disorder we talked about her

background her initial diagnosis and

recapped what it's like to live with

d.i.d tell everybody a little bit about

your life where let's start with where

you grew up

so i was actually born in riverside

california oh

right here baby yeah

and

i

grew up in goodyear arizona

okay so uh at the time

goodyear was like nothing but cotton

fields but yeah that's where i grew up i

lived in this one specific house

uh for like it was like 13

14 years or something

and then i moved all over arizona

and you mentioned in our premiere

episode that you're not working yes um

but you have been working in the past

what has your

work history looked like in relation to

did like what have you been able to do

and not do so when it comes to working i

can technically do

any job like it's it's not like i'm

being held back from anything

because of d.i.d um it's

right now i'm not working

because i was hired on

as like a seasonal person but i actually

had to go on medical leave right for the

depression so that's the only thing

that's really kept me from like really

getting back in there right

but the types of jobs that i've done

honestly like because i'm so into art

and creativity i've kind of bounced

around a lot and i've done a lot of

different jobs that just kind of

made me curious yeah yeah um for example

like i

i don't eat seafood i don't i'm not a

fan of fish or like anything like that

but i loved the art of sushi yeah so i

became a sushi chef yeah for a little

while you know just just like on the

side i wanted to learn how to how to

make the sushi and i loved how they

looked and

that's what got me into it you kind of

have this

this soul that goes with the flow you

have a flow soul like just whatever

suits your fancy or whatever catches

your interest you go into that

where do you think or where do you hope

that type of mentality will take you in

your life because that's a very exciting

way to live i think um so i mean i'd

love to be i i'm again i'm really into

art i'd really love to be able to do

some kind of like

at-home work where i'm just creating all

the time um

you know anything that i've done has

usually been about just creating

something

so

if it has to do with me doing like do it

yourself projects i'm like yes like

that's right up my alley so

um

as long as i can do something like that

i think i'll be like so happy yeah you

know like hopefully yes good i like that

now

your did diagnosis came in your early

20s remind our viewers on what led up to

that

so

honestly i'm not really sure like

how it like led up to it it was more

i had all these other things that i was

kind of struggling with my mom thought i

was just this troubled teen didn't know

what was going on and

because i was having so many other

things

it was starting to like stress me out

and then i think that's where a lot of

the symptoms for did started coming out

because a lot of people mistake

thinking that once you have did which

you get it from a child as being a child

um

but well it occurs during your child yes

you get it when you're a child and as

you're growing up

you don't always have symptoms

so some people are like i got did when i

was 13 and it's like well that's not how

it works it's like you still have d.i.d

when you're younger it's just your

symptoms started coming on at that time

so my symptoms started coming on in my

early 20s

and i had no idea what was going on i

was confused i

you know when i was actually diagnosed i

was very much like

uh no

that can't be a thing like i i can't be

trying to share my life with other

people like what's going on like i don't

think so and i was very in denial about

it um but the more i tried to deny it

and push it down

and like hide it the more the altars

were like well i'm gonna test you like

i'm gonna come out like i'm gonna do

this i'm gonna do that and it was it got

very hectic like i would there's times

when i like

lost days

where

i was like

i would think it was monday and it was

really like wednesday

because you've been an altar for the

last two days

so what brought you into that

doctor's office

and

what did that diagnostic process look

like so i was there actually for

depression

and it's somebody that i was seeing out

of her home and she was you know such a

sweetheart and she ended up moving

unfortunately so i wasn't able to

continue care with her

but

i was seeing her out of her home

and again just kind of going through

regular talk therapy and stuff and we

were doing um some cbt stuff

as well as um i forget what it's called

they're basically like she had these i

put in these earphones uh these

headphones and i was listening to like

these binaural beats like they're like

these specific tones that you listen to

that help to like make you feel better

and things

um

and

i was really anxious at that time and

she explained that basically

i turned into somebody else

and i started talking to her

as someone else and she was like oh okay

and was

uh no she said it was an older woman um

i don't know too much more about that

honestly like

it might have been devin since she's one

of the people that comes out a lot um

but

otherwise like yeah that was just kind

of how it came about and then

as i started to you know accept that

this is what it is

i started to you know

try to educate myself as much as i could

i tried to um

follow other people on youtube who had

like the id and like wanted to learn

about like their life and like how they

were kind of going through stuff and

um

i found a girl who

was going through all of the did things

and she was explaining oh well i

communicate to my alters

with like a journal and i was like

that's such a good idea i'm going to try

that so i tried it and we did it for so

long and

it was

yeah it was kind of

mind-boggling like seeing these

responses just appear

and you're just like

yeah and i'm like whoa

like it's almost like as if

you were like there's a ghost in the

house and like i'm gonna write the ghost

like a letter and the ghost response the

ghost responds and there's actually 11

ghosts and there's 11 ghosts yeah so

that that i just really understood yeah

i really felt that i get that

do you still communicate with the other

alters uh not as much through like i

still use the journal um with again the

alters that i'm not co-conscious with

but they're they're very

settled now

if that's the right terminology they're

they're not as active as they used to be

so whether or not like some of them are

a majority of them have

uh integrated into one one another or

they're just not being active like i'm

not really sure

um

[Music]

for like my main alters that i am

co-conscious with i still like

see that they're there so i'm like oh

i'm not like cured like type of thing

but

um

i see that they're there and i see that

you know minnie is still wanting to come

out like every day and stuff and she

still wants to play and um

but they're just they're just not as

active

how do you feel about that

um so so i have mixed feelings with it

i

love it and i don't necessarily hate it

but i kind of miss it because once you

live a certain way

and you have these like

they're almost like friends that you're

just like

you don't want to start to feel like

crazy or anything but you can talk to

these other people within yourself

and

you know when they're not as active

especially minnie like i'm so close to

minnie and i just hold her so dear um

that when she doesn't come out as much

i'm like oh like

like i i miss that sometimes like i'm

really not a kid person

you know like i love kids and i love

them like this but i don't know how to

be around kids so it's it's kind of

different with minnie being inside me

to where

i don't have to try and like pick her up

or like you know because i feel like i

would drop a kid like i'm so does that

make sense it does okay

as much as any of this yeah

i mean this is why we're having the

conversation to educate ourselves

when you say you talk to them

is there

is there internal dialogue going on so

like it can be internal or external okay

so you could you could just be in your

car

and in your head saying

all right well minnie simmer down or

devin what are you doing or whatever

yeah like if if there's something that's

happening a big trigger that minnie used

to have was anytime i was around like an

ice cream shop she would jump out and

get really excited about ice cream and i

had to

try to like settle that down

because when you're around people that

don't know that you have d.i.d and this

little girl comes out i scream you know

she's super excited you have to be able

to like communicate that with with her

and stuff so i started recognizing that

that was one of her triggers

and

you know i would start to feel like a

transition was going to happen and i

could tell it was many

and i can internally say not right now

but you can also

say not right now and get over oh yeah

ruled uh-huh

yeah oh yeah it can definitely happen

wow but again like i feel like i've

gotten like a better understanding and a

better hold on

how all of it works and stuff and

basically all of us kind of working as

like a team instead of being like well i

need more air time i need more air time

like type of thing you know

in addition to having the id which is

obviously a challenge itself

there are co-occurring disorders that

you have

one of them being major depressive

disorder with mixed features

when were you diagnosed with that

um so honestly it kind of

came about with uh so i was i was

diagnosed with that one specifically

actually pretty recently uh so i want to

say uh they just added on the mixed

features

um

it was i want to say maybe

six or seven months ago

okay um

but it all

kind of started coming about when i was

about like 13 or 14 when i was diagnosed

with pmdd

which is

pre-menstrual dysphoric disorder got it

okay

and you also have ptc ptsd yes complex

post-traumatic stress disorder

what is that so

how i would describe it is basically

like ptsd is when you go through one

severe traumatic event

whether it was like a catastrophic like

hurricane or

like somebody like abusing you in some

way but it's like one thing and you have

ptsd from that one

like thing

cptsd is when you've gone through it

multiple times you have reoccurring

traumas

you have

a lot of different like things that have

happened to you over time

so it becomes complex because

your

your trauma that you've gone through has

been so much more severe i guess what

was your trauma

i mean i've had a lot of traumas um

ever since like i was a kid like my so

my dad and his friends

this is where my did came from

ended up like raping and like molesting

me

[Music]

i've had

a lot of like abusive relationships and

stuff my dad actually at that time was

very abusive to my mom so

i had to

my mom told i don't remember this but my

mom told me that i like

watched him like drag her down the

hallway by her hair and i was like

chasing after them trying to protect her

and

so

i've gone through a lot

have you

[Music]

gone through everything you think you

need to go through to heal as much as

possible from that

no i'm still going through the healing

process i'm still

trying to find things that will work for

me um

i've gone through i've been in therapy

since i was like six years old i think

and

it's still a continuation of

what is gonna work and what isn't what

medications are gonna work what isn't

gonna work and so it's a lot of back and

forth it's a lot of testing and trying

and

work it's a lot of work and i think a

lot of people

they give up or they don't they don't go

to the doctor because they're like well

i know i've got issues i just don't want

to know about it

and

right now like i i want to know because

i'm desperate to heal

why are you have you always been

desperate to heal or is that a new yeah

yeah

do you believe that you will

you know lately i don't know anymore

why do you say that um

i'm 30 years old

and i've been in

trauma therapy treatment

treatments

i've tried medication after medication

because of the

mixed features that i have they found

out that i'm not

supposed to be on antidepressants

because

that can make things a lot worse

[Music]

it was kind of like described to me as

if like

you take these antidepressants and you

feel better about your plan

to commit suicide if there was a plan

which i don't have a plan

so

and that's usually what would happen

with people and they're like yeah so you

can't be on antidepressants so

i have to be on

and again just to kill the stigma

because it's called an antipsychotic

um which does not mean you are psychotic

i understand that

um

so either that or like a mood stabilizer

or one of the both

and you're

working with psychiatrists or a

psychiatrist i'm working with multiple

of them um

because

i was working with one and

she was out of town like this was like

over the holidays and stuff she was out

of town

and they had to cancel and reschedule my

appointment so much that it was going on

like it was going to be like two months

when i was gonna see her and i was like

uh-uh i was like i need something now

so um

that's actually when i went into like

the inpatient place and like had all of

that going through

but now i'm seeing

a new psychiatrist because she ended up

going to like another facility

um

and i

i'm seeing how this is gonna go it's

it's really frustrating when you know

you don't have consistency

so that's really what i'm looking for

right now is consistency when i get like

a therapist like

i want a therapist that i can stick with

you know see my progression with and not

have to

reopen all these old wounds and okay i'm

learning i'm meeting someone new so i

have to explain every situation again

right it's so good that you

know that though

most people do not understand

how to do therapy yeah they go in it

very blind they go in it very uneducated

it's not their fault it's just the way

the system is right now and they go to a

therapist one they don't interview them

if they don't like them that doesn't

matter they stay with them and then they

have a bad experience and just think

well therapy doesn't work yeah because

and it goes no that therapist didn't

work for you and what you needed and it

is a testing of trial and error yeah

perseverance a relentless pursuit it

really and your mental health is key

in going through therapy if you want to

heal you have to fight for it oh yeah

say that again you have to absolutely

fight for it yeah and that's what i've

been doing yes good for you to do that

how do you know why do you

know that and so many other people don't

because i want to

basically i explain it like i want to

want to live

i want to want to live

i've struggled so much

for so long

i just

really want some relief

yeah

in the life

where you're not struggling

as much

where your struggle is

what we consider normal

normal struggle

what does that life look like disneyland

wait the reason that's so funny is

because there was no thought it was just

like

disneyland that's my happy place like

okay so i

i describe it like

i have the

suicide ideation as in

i'm not planning on killing myself it's

just the thought of not wanting to be

alive

every day

and it's not a thought that ever leaves

my mind

and if i had like even if i'm having

like such a good time with somebody

because you can have great times but

still be depressed

if i'm having such a great time with

somebody but i had an on off switch like

a little light switch that i could just

pull to like

just shut my life down

i would usually want to pull it

but disneyland

i don't want to pull it why what about

that

it's just a happy place for me

it uh

the history behind it everything that

goes behind that place and like

that's just how i live my life i i

believe in magic

and i want to believe in

happily ever afters and

like

true romance and things

and that place just makes it possible

is it unrealistic to want that i don't

believe so

i think it's hard to find but i don't

think it's unrealistic

what would you have to do to

have a life that

made you feel that way

i don't know i'm still that's what we're

doing that's what i'm trying to figure

out

i get that that's what i'm searching for

well i like that you

know that you have to fight for it you

have to fight for it you're already

ahead of so many people by knowing that

that having that

you also have panic disorder and anxiety

when were those first

diagnosed so

i mean technically i've had it for a

really long time

but

being diagnosed with it i think i was

i want to say

maybe a couple of years ago that i was

actually diagnosed with it um

i didn't know

what

it felt like i've heard other people

saying oh my god i'm having a panic

attack and i was just like i don't

understand that like can you just

breathe and like calm down you know and

like

i would try to be there for them like

okay what can we do like what can help

calm you and stuff and you know most

people just are they're in a panic they

don't know um

and i started going through that

uh

you know a couple of years ago and i was

like oh man like

my heart felt like it was gonna like

beat out of its chest like i i felt like

i was like literally gonna die or

something and it would just get really

bad

there were so many little things that

just started becoming triggers where

like

i would just start having a panic attack

out of nowhere

um

i would take like an uber to work or

like into town or something and like

just being in the car i would like

okay hold on you're okay breathe like

you're you're safe you're in a car like

you're just going to work right now like

you're like i would have to talk to

myself like this and like do these

breathing exercises and like through all

of the therapy that i've been through

they basically teach you coping skill

after coping skill after coping skill

and

for me when my anxiety is is that high

like

nothing really works not even like

medication that i've been given like it

kind of numbs it a little bit but i'll

be awake for days with anxiety

so it's it's still a it's a struggle

you have slight ocd and adhd is this

true so yeah i do have adhd

and then uh slight ocd yeah

and you have the pmdd

i'm least familiar with that one can you

explain that so pmdd is basically it's

kind of like uh

you want to think of pms times 100. okay

so it's it's pms basically it's it's

like something that's like

grown out of pms so with pms obviously

both of them you're gonna have like

cramping and

uh

they should be normal cramps not like

debilitating cramps if you're having

debilitating cramps that could be

something else get it checked out

basically like you can have like a

little bit of depression and things like

that but with pmdd you're gonna have

like really bad depression you can have

really bad mood swings you can like you

can have suicidal thoughts and stuff and

it gets really bad so i started having

pmdd

when i

was i think i was

13 or 14

and i was i would be awake all night

crying bawling my eyes out like for two

to three days out of every month so we

we recognized that it was a hormonal

thing it was something with my period um

and

you know i'd just be up like crying to

my mom i don't want to live like i hate

life like you know and i was a teen a

teenager like really wanting these

things and

ever since it's just been this cycle to

really try and

hone it down and

try to figure out how can we get

the hormones and the

uh

all the other chemical makeup of the

mind like to just work together and like

be on a better scale

because everything's just been so hectic

major depressive disorder with mixed

features

c ptsd panic disorder anxiety pmdd

slight ocd adhd id yeah that's almost

all the letters in the alphabet

out of those eight

which one is the hardest for you the

depression yeah i i figured that would

be it

i want to ask you a question about the

d.i.d

it is often

confused

with borderline personality disorder epd

have you ever had that discussion with

your psych psychiatrist or ever been

diagnosed or misdiagnosed with bpd no no

so it's never come up on your right it's

never

they uh

i mean i i feel like professionals would

know the difference like a lot of people

don't know the difference yeah um but i

feel like the psychiatrists that i've

talked to have been very like well

educated and

the ones that

you know know about did because that's

usually what i'll um

that's what i'm searching for if i'm

gonna find a new like psychiatrist or a

therapist i'm looking for someone who

knows about did who's been educated in

it

um just so they're not going in blind

yes i know this is the first episode and

in the following episodes we're going to

go into more depth about

your co-occurring disorders

with did so the depression cptsd etc

what will viewers get

after watching the coming episodes

i can only hope to

give more education and kill more

stigmas and just really help other

people who are

just as desperate and searching for an

answer as well that's all i can do yeah

you're doing it you're doing it

thank you for doing that absolutely

[Music]

you


hi nice to meet you hey so I

understand that you referred here by

your GP because you've been feeling

quite down recently yeah I thought I

should I've been feeling quite bad for

quite a while so I thought maybe it's

time to see someone about it because I

don't want to feel like this anymore

okay so um from your notes I saw that

you saw the GP about three months ago

yeah and how long have you been feeling

down altogether and quite a few months

before that as well actually but it's

gotten pretty bad these past few months

so that's kind of why I came

okay so as it got worse since you saw

your gear yeah okay so tell me haven't

health how are things at the moment and

well it kind of started just feeling a

bit low and wound up about things but I

don't know just recently I I just can't

really be bothered to do anything at all

it kind of find it hard to get motivated

for things and I want to be I really

want to be better but it's just kind of

reaching the hem now or I just I want to

do something about it okay so you said

that you're feeling really down really

sad yeah and you feel like you haven't

got any motivation um but are you okay

yeah okay and you haven't got any

motivation but it sounds like you've put

quite a lot of pressure on yourself to

try and feel a bit better yeah I just

it's kind of hard as well because

there's not really anyone to talk about

some it just kind of stay on my own try

to I don't like to think about it but

actually so you say you've been feeling

quite isolated there's not many people

around yeah no one I can talk to about

it

don't listen I understand anyway okay so

I'm just going to try and find out a

little bit more about you so I

understand that you're an English

student at uni yeah and you live away

from home with some friends is that

right yeah

yeah okay so you don't you don't it far

from the Uni and but you say you feel

like you live with your friends but you

don't feel like you can talk to them

yeah I mean they're lovely I get on

really well with them but I don't know I

just recently whenever they want to go

out or stuff I just I don't want to

bring them down I can't they don't

understand what I'm going to they kind

of I didn't they didn't make fun of how

I feel but you don't really understand

what it's like I don't want to go out

with them and bring them down stuff okay

so it sounds do you try and hide the way

you're feeling from them I guess I mean

it's easier to hide it then to try to

explain it all the time when Lo and

Brady wants to know okay so it sounds

like you've been feeling down you've

been feeling unmotivated and you feel

like you want to be better but actually

it sounds like you feel like you can't

reach out for help you can't speak to

anybody no I don't really talk to my

parents about ether how's their hair

kind of hard okay I'm just going to go

back in time another suppose I'm just

wondering when when did all of this

start you said it's been going on for

quite a few months yeah um I guess it

kind of started when I was actually when

I was revising for my exams um I guess

the stress I put a lot of stress on

myself I think I've always wanted to do

well for me and I guess my parents so

the stress of exams and it was also kind

of hard because my parents were going

through a little bit a troubled time

limit so okay so this would be like last

March last April yeah take so around

that time so about six months ish and it

sounds like a lot was happening so you

had a lot of uni pressure on and he said

that your parents were having marital

problems

okay and it sounds like that was a real

shock to you yeah I guess it was hard as

well because I wasn't doing well at uni

any I guess I just felt a bit guilty I I

know it sounds silly but I felt like

maybe if I could do better than they

would get better but I didn't it just

wasn't really happening okay so it

sounds like you were trying to work hard

and be more successful because you

thought that that would make them

happier and try and fix things yeah I

wanted to make them feel better but it

just kind of kept fied a little I guess

how did it backfire well it just ended

up with them getting worse and I've just

been feeling worse since then okay so

after the summer after the exam period

and how did that exam period go for you

in the end

not very well hey there's an awful lot

of pressure to put on yourself you

supposed to she's just annoying because

I know I should have done better and I

just didn't and I guess I beat myself up

a lot of hmm so you say I know I know I

should have done better I mean I suppose

up hearing it from my perspective I'm

thinking it sounds like you had an awful

lot going on at the time it'd be

understandable absolutely that you

wouldn't do as well as normal I suppose

I'm just wondering if you have very high

standards for yourself properly it may

be more than other people my parents

have always kind of taught me not in a

loving way I guess but that you should

do your best but also get the best and I

agree with that I think that's the right

thing to think but when I don't do that

I don't know it annoys me a lot and I

worried that it annoys them so it sounds

like you feel you should always do your

best

already is yeah and that there isn't any

kind of exceptions for that but you know

okay

and so I can I can see then that was a

really difficult time for you and that

was when your moods started to get lower

and things are still

quite bad now I mean what's the

situation with your parents at the

moment um I think it doesn't sound good

I don't really talk to them a lot but I

don't think they're going through very

good I don't like to talk to them about

it because it just makes me feel worse

but I don't think it's getting any

better you home over the summer for a

little bit yeah and how is that not very

fun no hmm it was quite tense all the

time

stressed me out more than relaxed me

over the summer idea mm-hmm okay

okay so it sounds like quite a lot has

been happening you've been feeling very

low you've had a uni pressure on and

we've had problems with your parents

marriage and sounds like you feel that

you can't really reach out to anyone

that you can't understand but you can't

really reach out to your parents right

now

you can't really confide in your friends

and so I suppose I'm just wondering if

you can tell me a bit more about how

you've been feeling I mean say this past

week and really not good to be honest I

actually if I don't have to though I

don't really leave the house or get out

of but I just I can't find the

motivation for the things I used to join

them I used to love doing sports or

going out and now I just prefer to lie

in bed and not really do anything okay I

missed a few lectures this week that I

should have gone to but right so I

suppose I'm just wondering then it's as

if we can think about one thing say a

lecture what kind of thoughts do you

have about going to our lecture before

it happens I don't really see the point

anymore

if if I can't do as well as I should be

doing then what's the point in putting

myself in those positions I just I can't

be bothered anymore to try it just

stresses me out more than I need to do

okay so it sounds like the kind of

thoughts you've got in your head are

it's pointless and it's not worth it

yeah do you have any other thoughts in

your head when you're just at that point

before you go to the lek

so like I dunno I I don't really even

deserve to be here if I can't do well

enough I see all these other students so

doing well and doing better and want to

be there I don't know why I'm here even

that you need to be so it sounds like

you feel like you're not as good as

other people here yeah okay um I'm just

as sorry okay if I take this as we go

through it's just I'm trying to em I

guess understand what you're telling me

and it helps me just to write it down

and I'll share this with you later

okay so it sounds like those are those

are some quite negative thoughts to have

you're kind of saying you know it feels

like it's pointless it's more effort

than it's worth

and I don't deserve to be here I mean

when you have those thoughts how do you

feel very unworthy probably would be the

best way to put it kind of I don't know

lower than normal because then it makes

me think about all the things I should

have been doing better okay so what you

described there then he said I'm

unworthy I should be doing lots of

things better and those are kind of what

I would call thoughts actually I suppose

I'm trying to understand what it feels

like in your gut what kind of emotions

do you feel happier do you feel sad do

you what kind of emotions you feeling

when you have those thoughts sad you

don't happiness very sad a bit of kind

of anger and frustration as well

I noticed when you're kind of telling me

this and I know this is quite a heavy

topic but you're kind of laughing and I

suppose I wonder a little bit you a bit

you know how do you feel about having

these emotions talking about these

emotions yes

embarrassed mm-hmm but is it I've never

yet to talk about it's it's quite

uncomfortable to be in this situation

okay were you doing a great job I know I

know that this can be difficult okay so

it sounds like some of the thoughts

you're describing our it's pointless

it's more than it's worth I don't

deserve to be here I'm unworthy and

those kind of thoughts it sounds like

they just flip through your mind and and

then he's kind of describing different

emotions that those lead to kind of

scramming sad anger frustration

embarrassed what about in your body what

happens how do you feel kind of

physically I used to be I think from

those emotions very wound up very kind

of stressed all the time but recently

it's just a lot more draining than

anything just quite lethargic and I

can't be bothered anymore in it my body

reflects that but then when I try and

sleep I just can't seem to have a

satisfied night's sleep

it's really really frustrating so it

sounds like this is affecting as it's

draining you if your energy like like

your body can't be bothered I think

that's a really good way of describing

it and you're noticing sleep problems as

well and then what do you do so this is

so we're back to the point before the

lecture so you start having these

thoughts these emotions and you know

your body I guess it sounds like those

thoughts quite draining so we draining

your energy what then happens what you

do next

and

I kind of focus on the negative thoughts

when I probably should not think about

them but it I focus on them and then I

don't really want to do anything can I

stay in bed or so you think even more

about this kind of warring so you have

to do a bit of dwelling and you stay in

bed and it sounds like you don't you

know you haven't tried speaking to your

friends about it no family okay and then

after you've done that so after you've

not gone to the lecture you've stayed in

bed you kind of spent time as you said

focusing on those those thoughts those

negative thoughts how do you feel after

that to feel better or do you feel worse

I guess I fill up slightly worse but

then a bit numb in a way kind of once

you've felt that because I do feel tired

all the time I just try and push it out

and then you don't really think about

anything and it's almost nicer that way

than to keep focusing on how much you're

getting wrong and how much you can't do

stuff sometimes it's better just to not

think about it at all so it sounds like

in some ways it's a bit of a relief to

do that yeah but in other ways maybe

think it might make things worse

probably in the long run yeah

you


hi Hannah nice to meet you hi so I

understand that you were referred to me

by your GP because you've been

experiencing some anxiety difficulties

hmm yeah um yeah I guess it kind of

started like five six years ago okay

um it kind of escalated a bit and I've

just recently moved out um from living

with my parents so it made it a bit

worse I think okay is this the first

time that you've left home yeah I am yes

first time much the yeah um I was going

to a few years ago just thought it would

be easier to stay home okay so it's been

quite a big step in a big change and and

it sounds like that that was what led

you to go to your GP yeah so how has

that change things for you um Gennaro

its kind of I haven't really told anyone

so I mean it's made up like better and

since I feel hopefully this is this is

it like oh cool it'll help but I don't

know I don't like thinking that I've

like had to do this I never thought I'd

like be the kind of person you'd have to

actually go and like get help that makes

sense okay so how do you feel about

being here today

fits like scared I don't know hopefully

it will help

okay so we'd be a little bit anxious

about today yeah okay so I guess just

going back to and why you went to the GP

and how you've ended up kind of coming

here today so it sounds like you've been

experiencing anxiety for quite a few

years but just recently moved out of

home for the first time annum and that

was what kind of led you to go to the GP

so how did that change things how were

things after you moved out and I thought

that they'd be better but because I

thought I'd have to kind of be

independent and space actually a lot

were so I'm just kind of staying in the

house a lot I don't really have any

friends or anything I mean my family

come and visit a bit but it's not I

don't know it's kind of scary because

I've just been kind of let you just in

the flat by myself which I always

thought I'd like but I don't actually

like it okay so what other kind of

difficulties that you have been

experiencing

I mean I'm I'm a photographer and so I

kind of it's been stopping me a bit my

anxiety from being able to get work and

because every time you know there's an

opportunity that is kind of involving me

having to interact with people I just

tend to just turn it on so I was kind of

making things hard in that respect and

just kind of friends wise and everything

I'd feel like I'm just kind of

increasingly more alone so it's kind of

stopping me from making friends and you

know like relationships and stuff

O'Casey said that your difficulties are

getting in the way of you doing certain

things so they're they're stopping you

from taking up kind of certain types of

work and as a freelance photographer I

guess that that can be kind of a problem

and they're also stopping you or you

feel like it is stunting you socially

you're not kind of able to make new

friends and get to meet new people yeah

yeah and it was kind of easier when I

was at home because I was obviously I

mean my parents as have lost fine but

you know they would I'd go to places

with them or I'd kind of have people

there but more and more I'm just finding

myself just staying again a lot I mean I

went like two weeks give coffee with my

friends and the whole time I was just

kind of wanting to go home again so I

don't I just don't want to I don't want

that to happen I don't want to lose

everyone so huh see kind of worried

about how where this is going to lead to

yeah um yeah so you said that you first

noticed the anxiety kicking in when

about five or six years ago so you would

have been about 19 yeah and what was

happening around that time I guess I'd

finished school about a year before that

and I mean I've always been a bit shy at

school but it was never ever like it

didn't really affect that things as much

as not at all as much as it has been

doing the last few years I guess it just

started when it like my friends went to

university and I don't know I felt like

I was expected to kind of move out or do

something and then it just kind of

escalated from there I just stopped

going to parties all right

say no two invitations or and I thought

my job would help because I mean I love

it I really like doing photography but

I'm just kind of getting less and less

work as it goes on

so which is my fire keep saying no but

what kind of work is the most difficult

for you am your job I guess when it I

have to kind of be working with other

people and I don't like that it's like

when I'm trying to kind of would do an

event or something where there's a lot

of people they're not just photographers

but actual you know if I like taking

phrases of people that I don't know I

just kind of find myself saying now I

mean I want to do them but just scary

so I just don't do it so I has tell me a

bit more about what happens then so

let's focus on maybe an invitation to do

a job with you know it's going to

involve photography with with a group of

people and you're going to have to have

social interaction what kind of thoughts

go through your head just I mean I get

really hot and sweaty and I don't I feel

like everyone's kind of looking at me

and thinking that I'm just like really

stupid and feel like they're all going

to be staring and thinking I just can't

do my job and I'm just an idiot and I

mean they'll think that I just look like

a weirdo and I just try and I mean I

just kind of just try and get out of the

situation or just focus on something

else so that's why I like doing shots

where it's just me and the camera

because then I can just put all my

attention on that instead of having to

you know be with other people okay so it

sounds like you have quite a lot of

thoughts rushing through your head then

at another point where you get that

invitation you think people look people

stare people will think I'm a weirdo

there's quite a lot about what what you

think other people will think yeah and

how does that make you feel and just

makes me feel like an idiot makes me

feel like I just shouldn't even bother

trying to do it anyway I should just go

home and I just I think I just don't

want to be in that situation I just feel

like everyone else is fine

and they're normal and I'm just the

freak you can't like do normal things

and okay can you give me an example of a

recent situation maybe we can focus on

that like a work situation yeah time

when you may be doing a job with some

people and you've got the social anxiety

you know that you're describing about

that kick in

yeah and I was doing a job where it was

kind of like a nature shoe and I was

having to work with a lot of different

people and and and when they told me

about the job I thought it would be fine

I thought it was just going to be a few

other photographers but there are

actually people and you know I've taken

photos of people kind of in the trees

and stuff like that and I get they asked

me to him that sounds quite interesting

was that a fashion shoot yeah yeah it

was a fashion thing I think it was for

some kind of I'm not sure if it was a

campaign or something but yeah it was

really cool both find it found it really

hard to try and focus on max I was so I

was kind of feeling really anxious and

so it wasn't what you expected

no no so how long ago was that

that was two weeks ago okay so it's

quite recent yeah so on that particular

day what were the thoughts that you had

in your head when you were in that

situation just felt really just really

kind of heart I couldn't really breathe

and just felt like I wanted to just get

out and I was kind of trying really

really hard to just focus and just you

know like kind of hold the camera and

just not think about anything but I just

felt like everyone was looking at me and

like when they'd say action and they'd

try and get me to start and I was just

felt like everyone was just thinking I

was really stupid and I shouldn't have

been there and I can tell you getting

kind of anxious even just thinking about

that day yeah okay so you describe him

quite a lot there to me so you're saying

that you kind of got hot and sweaty he

said that you held the camera yeah what

was do you mean you kind of trying to

hide behind it or I was just like I

focused on it I was just thinking if I

could just hold it really tightly it

would just I don't know I'd kind of just

be able to just get through it and just

further you're holding the camera very

tight yeah and why was that why was that

helpful because I felt like I was

getting really like hot and flushed and

I just

though at least if I can just I don't

know it sounds weird but I was just

trying to keep my hands still on it

because my hands are kind of sweaty and

like shaking like loads like and I could

just tell everyone was looking and they

could see and I just thought if I just

managed to hold on to it it wouldn't be

as noticeable but okay so okay so it

sounds like you had a lot of thoughts

going through your head and he said that

you worried that everyone's looking at

you what other thoughts were there that

were in your mind just I was just just

stupid and was just really just felt

really like a kind of like everyone was

just going to be staring and just

thinking that I just felt like everyone

was looking at me and just they could

tell and just thinking or what what's

she doing and they could tell what that

I was just really like sweaty and just

so fat so oh like that they could see

that yeah yeah and I was trying to wear

black so this kind of tries to cover it

up and just like a lot of layers so they

can't tell but I mean my hands like they

was so shaking I was really red and just

was just wishing that I just wasn't

there so I mean you've already described

it to me a little bit but if you think

about how you look that day how do you

say how do you think he looked I think

just really stupid and like I think my

face was really red I could feel it

flushing and I knew vow'd was probably

sweating and shaking like my hands were

definitely really really shaking and and

ever it was like definitely really

noticeable everyone could definitely

stay ok and what did you do about how

did you try and conceal that or hide

that and well again I was trying to grip

the camera just look down just trying

not to do anything weird or because I

mean that they could probably tell I was

being weird anyway but hopefully if I

just tried really hard to just focus and

look down not try it like not look at

anyone else and just yeah just kind of

try and get on with it as best as I

could but so you avoid looking at people

and sounds like you wore black as well

in kind of preparation anyway yeah no I

always do that even if it's really hot

or I wear just loads of layers and just

because

was I'll just be really sweaty and like

people would definitely be able to see

so okay and how did it end well it kind

of went on for like an hour or so and

then people were going and just after

every shoot people go out for drinks

after just to kind of celebrate like

that we've done it I just I went home

straight away just got in my car and

went home I just didn't want to be

around them especially after they would

have seen me being weird and I just

wanted to go get home straight away okay


you

jazzmin hi my name is IDM your counselor

today we're going to meet in a room to

our left something a bit more private

than this area out here should we go

there now yeah let's go

so we're just going to go up the hall

and to the right and then there's a room

on the left should I go first okay come

in Jasmine this is the room that we'll

be meeting in today and if you come back

again we'll be in this room again what I

want you to do first is perhaps have a

look around and choose where you would

like to sit where you'd like to be just

the big chair over there yeah so when

you're ready just make your way over to

the chair and I'll close the door and

from where you're sitting now where do

you think you'd like me to be in the

room which chair would you like me to

sit in not on in this chair here yeah I

can I've got your drink of order just

move my chair round

to face you that's all right how's the

distance between us would you like more

room would you like me further back or

more forward that's like--that's okay

okay so I want to invite you here to

look around look around the room take in

this new space you've never been here

before

see if there's something your eyes want

to rest on or if there's anything

Pleasant - your eyes have a really good

stickybeak around the room most people

most times we come into new environments

we want to have a good stickybeak in my

diet and you can in here I imagine it's

pretty tough for you to be here yeah

yeah

what would help you to spend a moment

here if you love you took hold of that

pillow yeah what's it like to have that

pillow against your tummy it's nice yeah

what's it like to have your hands

holding tight there like that does that

help you to be here yeah how did you how

did you get here my mom dropped me home

here here I'm doctor she's still here no

she's not here is there an arrangement

to pick you up yeah yep

man you're looking at the time so what

time did you arrange for mom to pick you

up um like half now in half an hour yeah

yeah yeah so notice you're looking

around a little bit more now helps a bit

more with that pillow doesn't it that

was a good idea for you to put the

pillow there yeah so how long do you

think you'd like to be here if you had a

choice of how long you were going to be

here with me in this conversation how

long would it be

maybe love another 15 minutes maybe

another 15 minutes yeah okay maybe maybe

if we just took then that 15 minutes

just to get used to the room just to get

used to being in this space being in

that chair with what it's like to have

your feet on the ground what's it like

to feel your seat when you're back on

the chair with the support of that

pillow that was such a good idea to get

that pillow it's a good resource yeah

because it's helping you to be here yeah

so notice how it's a struggle to be here

but there's still something that helps

you to be here so on one hand there's a

struggle and on the other hand there's

some kind of a little bit of support

even if it's a tiny bit takes the edge

off because if both is there in the room

yeah what's it like for you to consider

that it's not going to be half now that

it's going to be 15 minutes now I feel

better

feel better mmm yep we can just call mom

and tell her that the first session is

shorter yeah because it's enough how

it's really confronting to be here a lot

of people find it confronting to come

here because of the name of the agency

the issues that we may talk about in the

future it's pretty confronting so just

getting used to being here is a pretty

big deal and you're doing a great job

you're doing really well

yeah and I'm here with you


hi jody nice to see you again

how have you been since i saw you last

yeah i've been fine um

been sticking to the plan so

it's been going well hold the plan that

the hospital set you yeah okay fantastic

and how have you been finding that

yeah it's been it's been good um

i've been

trying to follow it but

last week wasn't very good i had a bit

of a bad day but since then i've been

fine so it's okay okay so tell me a bit

more about that bad day i mean what did

you eat on that day

um

i

don't think i had anything

okay so you just ain't nothing at all

yeah

okay i mean tell me a bit more about why

was that day difficult

was there anything

that had been happening around that time

um

it's been quite busy at school because

we've got our exams and we had like a

test

the next day so i think i was just a bit

like worried about that so i was trying

to

focus on that instead so you were

feeling a bit anxious about the exam

that was coming up was there anything

else that was worrying you

um

i think

we had um

well we had six form applications jimin

and

that was coming up in the next couple of

days and i didn't really want to

fill in my application

for that

so it sounds like there was a couple of

things that were worrying you that were

on your mind yeah which thing was

worrying you more do you think

probably the same form

yeah the city film one okay what kind of

how did you feel about that when when we

talk about that now when that's brought

up what kind of emotions do you

experience

um

i don't really want to start sixth form

yet

it's quite soon but i don't really want

to i mean i've got exams first so i've

got to think about those

but i don't really want to go to sit

form

at the minute

okay so

what is it about sick form that makes

you not want to go

i have to start over again and make new

friends and

and like a new routine and stuff and i

don't

i don't really feel ready for that yet

what do you think might happen when you

have to make new friends and start a new

routine

i don't

i don't know if anyone's going to like

me like

if

they might not want to talk to me and

then i won't be able to like focus on my

work and

and get through it so you're worried

that you might not be able to make

friends yeah you might not be able to

focus on the work yeah and how do you

feel when you have those thoughts

um

a bit worried

i don't know

what people are going to think so i

don't want to upset them

and say anything wrong or do anything

wrong

and i suppose i'm just trying to

understand kind of

because that what you were just

describing that's more what i would kind

of think of as being a thought you know

worrying about what what people might

think and that people might think the

wrong thing

and i suppose i'm wondering how you're

feeling you said you feel worried are

there any other emotions that you feel

about it

um

i feel it makes me feel a bit sick

inside

having to

talk to new people so you feel a bit

worried and a bit sick

how easy is it for you to

think about those kind of emotions and

those feelings that you're describing

i don't really think about them and just

try and ignore them

and get on with what i need to do

were you aware that you were feeling

worried

on the day

that you stopped eating you were

conscious that you were feeling anxious

and worried

no i didn't feel worried

that day

i was just trying to get on with my work

and

i actually felt a bit better that day

okay

so why do you think that you turned to

stopping eating because i mean now i

suppose now that you're aware that you

are feeling worried

about sick form and about

the exam

why do you think that you opted to stop

eating on that day

what was it about that do you think that

you thought might be helpful

i i didn't feel like i needed to because

i i didn't feel hungry

so i just wanted to

do my work and

and then it made me feel better and i

felt more

i felt more focused on my work so i

thought i should carry on

with that

because i needed to revise

so you thought it helped you to focus

and you felt like it helped you

do you feel like it did help you with

the revision

yeah i was more focused on on the work i

needed to do

okay so you felt like it improved your

focus as well yeah

okay is there any other reasons why you

think you might have turned to

constricting your diet at that time

i think

my

my father wanted me to

like my dad he wanted me to um

focus on my work because of my exams so

i didn't want to like upset him and i

thought i needed to do well

in the test

so i was trying to do that

so you thought that by not eating you

would help yourself to do better in the

exam and kind of please your dad

yeah

and do you think that it was helpful

constricting your diet

it seemed to be i got more work done

during the day

because i didn't get distracted by

anything so i could i was revising all

day and then

the test went really well so it should

be good

you should get a good mark for it

you seem like you may be getting a

little bit anxious right now i know it's

that you're shaking your leg

is there anything that you're worried

about right now

um

i just don't want to like upset my

parents and make them

feel like i'm a disappointment to them

if i don't do well

okay is that something that you're often

worried about

usually because i don't want them to

think like they shouldn't have had me

because

i'm so worthless to them

okay that's quite a heavy

worry to be carrying really have you

talked to them

about this worry

no you haven't said it to them before

how do you think they

might react if they did know that you

felt this way

they'd probably say like

as long as i do well i'll be fine like

and they'll love me if i

do well in my exams and go to a good

sixth form and get good grades

so you think that maybe they wouldn't

love you if

you didn't do well go to a good sick

form

i don't see how they would want to if i

was so worthless and useless at whatever

i do

okay so it sounds like you're really

worried about

losing your parents love and approval

and you think that by

passing these exams

you will

you will kind of secure that love and

approval from them


so we're here today to talk about CBT

and your experiences of it how did you

feel initially about the thought of

going for CBT my clinical psychologist

has told me that I needed to see someone

I thought I didn't need to see someone

because there was nothing wrong with me

I just had a heart disease and I my

heart disease had got so severe and I

was just tired and there was no one that

could make it better by listening to me

you're talking to me the only thing I

thought that could heal me was heart

surgery and when he suggested that I see

someone it didn't seem to make sense but

because I was so depressed so far gone I

my husband through my husband I thought

are trying just take a chance and just

listen to someone or let someone listen

to me because I wasn't sure what it

entailed I've never been to a clinical

psychologist before so to me as a

clinical psychologist was a shrink you

must have had something seriously wrong

with your brain that she needed to see a

clinical psychologist and I didn't need

to see one but when I did meet her and I

realized that not being able to make up

my mind about going for surgery for

heart surgery and putting my name down

on the list I needed someone to help me

accept it in order to get surgery done

because I didn't want to get surgery

done and she listens to me and to the

way I felt and what was making me hell

hold back on surgery and what made me

feel the way I did and finally enough as

a woman you tend to feel that you can't

cry on someone else's shoulder but for

the first time just letting my emotions

out to her she helped me cry and by me

speaking to her it helped me see myself

from the inside if that makes sense I

then I began to understand why I had to

get heart surgery done it wasn't because

I was tired but I had my family and

everyone that went through the road with

me of suffering with Matt said you need

to get it done and then eventually I did

my name down on the list not knowing it

would be done so quick because I

supposed it was supposed to take me six

to eight months to get heart surgery

done but when I started seeing my

clinical psychology I understood it I

put my name down and I got my surgery

done in 30 days time so it sound then

like part of their clinical

psychologists role with you is to help

you to make your decision around whether

to get surgery or not yes but you also

said that you were quite depressed at

the time was the CBT helpful for your

depression as well it helped because

then instead of crying and holding

things back emotionally it helped me let

things out and by letting things out it

helped me understand what I was feeling

because most of the time we bottle

things up we never let them out - or we

never talk to each other or other people

so when we bottle stuff up it makes it

harder for us to figure out ways to

solve problems sometimes it can be a

little problem and we turn it into a big

problem because we just don't

communicate with other people or talk

things over to make it easier to

understand and she helped me understand

and I saw her before surgery right

through my heart surgery and after heart

surgery and she helped me by then by the

time I started doing heart surgery I had

lost my self-confidence I was so

depressed I was so withdrawn but after I

had heart surgery and I carried on

seeing her she helped me gain my

confidence back again

she helped me gain my trust again she

helped me see that there was something

worth loving for again and in lots of

times when I think of the things that

dr. penny did for me it brings tears to

my eyes and makes my heart well up

because um I didn't know another person

could do that for you

by just listening to you you know like

when we go to mom when you got a problem

and you think no one can understand but

my mom can because she knows where I'm

coming from but it's not to say that

clinical psychologists are like that but

it's just the way they listen to you

just having that someone that can listen

to you and just be the MP stop be quiet

and let you express yourself that's how

and help you find out what the problems

are that you've got and help you solve

those problems if they can was there

anything about the CBT in particular

that you found was helpful for you dr.

penny was neat with me every step of the

way with all the problems that I had

she helped me show me that there's an

easier way to solve everything and not

make a big problem out of everything

there's always someone every step of the

way that stayed too healthy if you need

a helping hand and that's how I in by

the time I had finished therapy with her

I found out that clinical psychologists

are not just drinks they are people like

us and they do feel like us and it's so

much easier to speak to someone when

you're having problems because we also

do in our lifetime break down sooner or

later it you don't have to be mentally

ill you can be in a car accident any any

problems in the home it's something you

can't even have a death in the family

that you can break down with and you

need somebody just to hear you how you

feeling because we all assume that

somebody else naturally knows what I'm

feeling or thinking but it's not that

way we all different were there any

drawbacks to going for CBT in the

beginning I didn't I didn't have any

drawbacks going for CBT because I was so

severely depressed I needed it and I

found that there were people all around

that would help me so there was nothing

the only see the raw stopping me was me

so it sounds like it was a good

experience yes have you got any advice

that you would want to offer anyone who

is thinking now about going for CBT yes

don't look at the word CBT but look at

the person behind it because sometimes

we see big words and we don't understand

the meaning of those words and we assume

but sometimes when we look behind

would like clinical psychologist I would

have said a shrink and I would never

have thought myself going to one because

they deal with mental people but it's

not that is you can help suffer from

depression you can suffer from any kind

of illness and it's so good to go to a

clinical psychologist when you need them

because one sooner or later in our lives

we will need one and most people when

you know like when you find younger

people that are nowadays lots of young

people are going under so much stress in

life if you haven't got a parent or a

friend and you're suffering from

depression those are the right people to

speak to because it's good to be able to

have someone in your life that you can

talk to

cuz I know there's no one in my family

that I can talk to I always think my

husband would never understand me my

kids would never understand me but when

I go to the doctor he never has that

enough time for me but with the clinical

psychologist they make that time for you

and they listen to you you've got you've

got that time with them to express

yourselves and you still got follow-ups

and they can check on you and make sure

everything's all right if you not

everything's not all right they can

always check and find ways and means to

help you get you in touch with other

people that can help you or get in touch

with other people that are the same

having the suffering from the same

conditions as you and you can swap ideas

with each other to find and live a

happier life


so high let hi thanks so much for

joining me this afternoon

so we're here to talk about some of your

experiences in accessing the NHS and

social care and maybe could we start by

you telling me about some of the health

challenges that you've experienced well

like I said before I've got lots but the

main ones are that I had polio as a

child which is now affecting me in

what's locally known as post-polio

syndrome and this means that some of the

problems of mobility and breathing

really really difficult at the moment

and that obviously has a big impact on

everything I asked to go to walk far I

struggle to remember things just just

generally lots of little things that

kind of mount up I have had other health

issues in the past I had unfortunately a

ruptured appendix which led to serious

bowel surgery that has got obvious

implications which I'd rather not talk

about

I had a pituitary trouble as a child or

mom trouble later I had the loss of my

husband who had a brain tumor and then

my parents who were very elderly who did

very well but had heals that I helped

look after they have now gone so yeah

I'm not had to easy yeah but I'm still

here and that's the me so it sounds like

you've very young age

the polio problem certainly did it was

bad at the time but unfortunately I

thought it was better I had problems

throughout my childhood like things

where I couldn't run very far or no you

know I couldn't understand where

everybody else could swim up and down

the swimming baths and I was punching

him found him but I didn't associate it

nobody told me it was the result of the

polio until as I got into my forties

fifties when this syndrome was like

garlic post-polio syndrome became

identified I wasn't alone other people

although few of them was suffering the

same way well I'm not unfortunately and

title to very much this is the other

issue I think sometimes some of some

established health issues better treated

than others so as far as the post polio

always eventually was able to ink its

ascertain a blue badge for parking

because it's difficult to walk far from

wherever I've left my car but every

three years I needed that reassessing as

if it was going to get better I do

appreciate that a lot of people take

advantage of these things but there are

an awful lot of people similar to me

whose health issues are not ever going

to get better

and it kind of feel a bit tree mail tree

did badly treated in having to go

through all these procedures again I

have bought myself a mobility scooter I

have bought myself a little pusher thing

but I've had to provide all these things

out of my pocket I know I'm lucky enough

to be able to afford it but you know

it's a bit of a two-tiered system

sometimes so what processes are involved

in reapplying well you get a form to

fill in you've to go to get photographs

again you have to

get a letter or something rather from

your GP to say that you are entitled to

this then you have to go to a board and

be assessed with people asking you all

these of the questions again watching

you walk up and down watching whatever

it is you owe problems you have and then

them deciding but yes you are okay and

unfortunately in my opinion this is only

my opinion I guess not always the person

who's doing this it's the right person

to be doing it some you know and I

appreciate that you can't always have a

fully trained doctor to out to do this

but some of the most of these people are

just administrators and don't really

know so how have you found using the NHS

well one of the things that's I think

has got more difficult over the years in

fact it's almost you but it's the fact

that you have now if you see more than

one doctor and you need to tell them

you've moved your address or this that

and the other

you've got to tell each individual

department separately when I first went

there you there was a you rang up when

you to their moving house and somebody

took all the details and that was the

end of it these days when I ran to tell

the limits at James is that I was moving

if they ask me which consultants I said

well which one do you want to know they

said well you have to tell them all I

said what individually said this is a an

electronic age and I have got to inform

a key Department yes I thought that was

crazy I thought that was absolutely

crazy

you had to ring each one of course you

know you know what it's like you hang up

you are in the third in the queue you

will be answered as soon as possible we

apologize and he listened to all its

music and eventually somebody answers

and then you tell them that many said

can you put me through to the new pump

I know you'll have to bring again now

that's just not some absolute nonsense

and you mentioned before when we were

talking about a oh yes partly as a

result of the polio my right knee was

okay but the left side was affected and

I spent a lot of a lot of treatment on

the left knee and the consultant said to

me about a time you 60 euros and he'll

be an absolute mess and you'll need a

new replacement and I went away and

thought well that's four years ago you

know I won't but for me but then of

course these things catch up with you

and somebody at work said to me you do

realize you're actually waddling and

your right leg is beginning to bend so I

said well yes it does a bit to be honest

so I went to the GP s-- who said well he

will send you for an x-ray and I went to

send to Chapel a little bit and this

x-ray and these days you're very good

this is a possibly energy that you

actually get a copy of the report sent

to the patient which said this knee

needs replacing

more or less ASAP and so I went to the

GP and said well I've had the coffee you

must have had one so he brought it up on

the screen and he said oh yes we'll send

you for some physio to which I said well

it says I need a new knee and he said oh

no we don't do that we have to have your

physio first you might get better and I

said well it's ER I says well anyway

I've got four I've helped private Elvin

Jones oh well you can go along now wait

don't straight away and referred me and

I could have lived on the next week but

the NHS procedure is you go for physio

and he had probably probably out to work

from weeks before I could have even had

that and they when I did actually have

the knee replaced which I didn't have

straightaway because of having to sort

out care for my parents the consultant

who did it so they should have been done

so far sooner it was a complete mess

they've been like if either way didn't

even longer probably melt because I know

that I know that I know you all want to

hear this but I know as an employee that

they in general do their best I think

the one thing I would advise is that you

really try and prevent rather than wait

until something happens we should try

and support the health service that we

have better


Speaker 1:
Hi Gabriela. Um, I understand that you are here today cuz you've been experiencing some low mood.

Speaker 2:
Yeah, I just, um, recently I've just, I'm just feeling down a lot and I can't really like snap out of it. Like sometimes if it's happened before I can just like get myself back on track, but recently I'm just finding it really difficult to do.

Speaker 1:
Hey, so it sounds like you've been experiencing some low mood and you're kind of struggling to get going a bit. Yeah, definitely. You've had low mood in the past, but it's kind of, you've been able to pull yourself out of it before, but yeah. More recently you found that harder. Okay. So I understand that you, um, you first went to your gp, you referred you here about two months ago. Um, can I ask what, what led you to go to the GP in the first place?

Speaker 2:
Um, my long-term boyfriend broke up with me and it was, it was such a shock, like I really wasn't expecting it and um, it just got me really down and I just felt really lonely and, and I didn't really wanna see people and she wanted to be in my own space and my mom told me I should probably go to the doctors and Oh, and, and he's referred me to you.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So it sounds then like you, you had that breakup and you weren't expecting it, so it kind of came out of the blue a bit and um, and that you've been on your own quite a lot so you've not been seeing people as much and, and it sounds like your mom noticed that there's been a bit of a change in you. Um, okay. And, and how have things been then since then, since that happened and since you went to the gp?

Speaker 2:
I just, nothing's really changed. Nothing's really improved. I just, I just feel down like everything's an effort and just feel distant from things and like I said, I can't snap out of it.

Speaker 1:
Okay. And how did you feel about coming here today?

Speaker 2:
Um, how's kind, I was kind of disappointed in myself because I feel like nobody else my age is doing this. Like I should have been able to snap out of it. Like it's just another thing that I've not really, it's another thing that's making me stand out for the wrong reasons.

Speaker 1:
Okay, so you feel like it's kind of odd or unusual to be Yeah. Coming to see a clinical psychologist? Um, I suppose I just want to reassure you that it's absolutely normal to, to have feelings of depression, um, and anxiety. It's, it's really very common and it certainly isn't odd or strange at all. Um, so it sounds like it was actually quite hard for you to come here today. Yeah. So what I guess led you to do that? Cause it sounds like maybe there was a lot pushing you against coming here today, but you've managed to come anyway.

Speaker 2:
Um, I'm just hoping that it's gonna help. I think I didn't, I didn't really wanna admit it because like it's just, just another failure. But my mum was talking to me and, and if she's, she's not really happy with the way I'm behaving and I don't really wanna disappoint her again and so I thought there's no harm in it, so she thought come. Okay.

Speaker 1:
So it sounds like partly you're doing it then for your mum cuz you're a bit worried that she Yeah. She isn't pleased with you at the moment.

Speaker 2:
Yeah.

Speaker 1:
Okay. Um, well I think it's great that you've come here and definitely there's a lot of evidence to suggest that psychological therapy, um, can help depression and particularly the type of therapy that we are gonna be doing, which is called cognitive behavior therapy. And I'll tell you a bit more about that as as we go on, but I'm just trying to find out a bit more about you today. Okay. Um, so I saw from your notes that you are a medic student.

Speaker 2:
Yeah. Um, I'm not currently in uni at the moment, but yeah, last year as a medic student.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So I guess, uh, why, what's, what's the reason that you're not in uni this year?

Speaker 2:
Um, I was like, it was, it was pretty tall first year, so they've then suggested that I took a year out. This is the break.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So just thinking, so that would be about six months ago, was it that your year out started? Yeah. Um, and it sounds then maybe like your first year was also quite tough.

Speaker 2:
Yeah, it was. I I thought it was tough for everyone, but obviously we'll take it in different ways, don't we? Mm-hmm. <affirmative>

Speaker 1:
And you are planning on, are you planning on returning?

Speaker 2:
Um, yeah, I'm gonna have to really so that, yeah.

Speaker 1:
Okay. Don't sound too sure about that though.

Speaker 2:
I think returnings probably that's what's gonna make everyone happy and I think, you know, at least I'll be able to, um, finally achieve something and get something right. So Yeah, like next year I'm gonna, I'll get through it. Yeah.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So it doesn't, it doesn't sound like you want to go back.

Speaker 2:
I do. Um, I, I do enjoy it. I just, I just don't feel like me at the moment and I just, it's a lot of work and it's a lot of pressure and, but that's what comes with it and you know, it'll work out for the best if I go.

Speaker 1:
Okay. Um, so I guess then there's quite a lot of thoughts and feelings about going back at the moment. Yeah. Um, I'm just wondering in the meantime, what are you, what are you up to? What have you been doing?

Speaker 2:
Um, well I've not really had much on the horizon. My mum um, her friend owns a restaurant and like she suggested that did a bit of waitress in there just, you know, for a bit of like money and stuff. Cause obviously I'm not in uni so, you know, I've done that.

Speaker 1:
Okay. How many shifts have you done there?

Speaker 2:
Um, I've only done one so far. Um, yeah, I don't know whether it's something that I'd probably go back to, but Okay.

Speaker 1:
How when was that shift?

Speaker 2:
It was, it was last week actually.

Speaker 1:
Okay. And, and how was it, I suppose I'm intrigued. Can you tell me a bit more about that?

Speaker 2:
Um, it was, it was different, you know, because it was like I could, I did enjoy it because there was like, it's just different aspects and I had to like, speak to people and like try to get their orders and try to remember it and stuff. Like I wasn't very good but I suppose like it was handy to have some money and like get out the house.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So it sounds like you, you quite enjoyed that then. Yeah. Um, what makes you think you weren't very good?

Speaker 2:
I just like, I was just a bit slur and people, sometimes they didn't understand what I was saying so I'd have to talk louder or quieter or slur and I got a bit confused sometimes with the orders and I just don't really think that I'm not really like a friendly, like people don't really think that I'm a friendly person, so they didn't really want to talk to me and stuff. I felt like I was like inconvenience in them by like asking them things and getting things wrong. But yeah, they said, they said that apparently, um, most people get like a few mistakes on a fair shift mm-hmm. <affirmative>, but then again she's my mom's friend so

Speaker 3:
That's

Speaker 2:
Probably why she's saying it.

Speaker 1:
So the person who owns a restaurant is your mom's friend? Yeah. Um, okay, so it says you, you're saying that you, you think you weren't very good and that's cuz you were a bit slow and you got confused with some orders. Yeah. Is it, but you said it's common for people to do that on that first shift?

Speaker 2:
Well, that's what she said to us, but um, but it's probably just, she's just trying to make me feel better. She probably felt sorry for me because I'm obviously not very good at it. Like, I'm not very good at any things. Recently I think she just felt sorry for me.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So I've just been loading down some of those thoughts that you've been having. You kind of say that you feel like you're not very good, you're slow, you are, uh, confused with the orders. Um, you feel like you're inconveniencing her and she feels sorry for you. Um, I suppose I'm wondering, I mean, what makes you think that she feels sorry for you?

Speaker 2:
Well, like, like I said, she's my mom's friend and she's obviously feeling sorry for my mom as well because she's got a daughter that's not like anyone else of her age and she's just like all alone and she's not getting involved. So I think she just feels sorry for me and she doesn't wanna like, say anything to upset me.

Speaker 3:
Mm-hmm.

Speaker 2:
<affirmative>. Okay.

Speaker 1:
When you're having these kind of thoughts, cuz that's quite a lot of negative thoughts you are describing, how do you feel?

Speaker 2:
You feel empty? I don't, I'm just calling as it is. I'm just calling it as reality and I, I feel like I'm being honest with myself by just voicing it and not trying to get around hiding it because I know like I can see it in myself.

Speaker 1:
So it sounds like you feel like those thoughts are very true then. I mean, if you were gonna rate them, uh, Sam, I'm gonna pick out some of those thoughts you described. He said I'm not very good, um, and I'm inconveniencing them. How much would you say you believe those on a scale? Um, out of a hundred,

Speaker 3:
Um,

Speaker 1:
Where a hundred is like, I absolutely believe it and zero is like, I don't believe it at all.

Speaker 2:
About 80.

Speaker 1:
So you, yeah. So you feel quite sure that you definitely believe those. Okay. And you said that when you are thinking those thoughts, you start to feel quite empty?

Speaker 2:
I just feel distant and like I said, I'm not really myself, I just like, it's like I'm not really there, but when I am I can't even do a good job and,

Speaker 1:
Okay. Are there any other emotions that you experience?

Speaker 2:
I feel drained. I don't feel like I'm in touch with anything, just, it's like everything's going on around me, but I'm just not there. I'm just, it's like, I'm just watching.

Speaker 3:
Okay.

Speaker 1:
So you feel empty, distant, you feel drained. Um, and how, when you're feeling these emotions, how do you feel in your body? Kind of what sensations do you notice?

Speaker 2:
I dunno how to describe it. I get like, I have a bit of like, like, you know when you kind of get like butterflies when you're nervous and stuff

Speaker 3:
Mm-hmm.

Speaker 2:
<affirmative> kind of get a bit of that.

Speaker 1:
Did you feel some butterflies? Yeah. Did you have butterflies that night when you were at the restaurant?

Speaker 2:
Yeah, but I was pretty nervous then, but when I got into it, they went away and like, it distracted me for a bit until obviously I realized that I wasn't doing a very good job.

Speaker 3:
Mm-hmm. <affirmative>.

Speaker 1:
Okay. And when you, when you have those emotions, how does it affect your energy levels? Do you feel more energetic, less energetic, or about the same?

Speaker 2:
When I'm feeling down.

Speaker 1:
Yeah. When, when you're having those emotions that you were describing?

Speaker 2:
I just feel drained. Like I didn't even have like, the energy to wake up in the morning sometimes like I just feels pointless and like my body's heavy and I don't wanna, yeah.

Speaker 1:
So it sounds like you feel very tired, you are struggling to wake up. Yeah. You said it's pointless. And, um, what do you do then when you feel like that? So I guess you just talked about when you wake up in the morning and you feel heavy and I, I suppose you've been maybe having some of these thoughts and those emotions potentially the night before. What do you then do? How do you respond to that?

Speaker 2:
I just have to get off I suppose. I don't really have a choice because my mom, I live with my mom and I know it's hard for her, so I don't want her to be too worried. So I just, I just try to carry on as normal. Mm-hmm. <affirmative>, I get up, it takes longer and I don't want to, but I do and I'll get on with my routine.

Speaker 1:
So you're a bit slower in get getting up? Yeah. But you are still getting up anyway. And what about your kind of, what do you think about when you're doing that?

Speaker 2:
I'm just thinking that nobody else is like me. It's my age. Like nobody should be feeling like this and it, I'm the only one that does.

Speaker 1:
So it sounds like you think a bit more about the problem and you kind of spend time thinking about how you see it.

Speaker 2:
I hate having it. I don't, I don't want to feel like this, but I do Okay. And nobody else I know does. So it makes me feel even more alone and like getting even more down and I just don't wanna disappoint anyone and I, I just don't really want it.

Speaker 1:
Okay. So it sounds like you try and toughen up on yourself a little bit, tell yourself to work harder to be different. Yeah. Okay. And, and when you start telling yourself that kind of thing and how does that make you feel? Does that make you feel better afterwards or worse?

Speaker 2:
It feels worse because I still can't snap out of it. Like, I'm aware it's happening and I just, and I'm trying, but I just can't. And then, and then it's just another thing that I'm feeling at, it's just another thing that I can't really get.

