- The idea that I would complain or think negatively

about my life sends me into a tremendous amount of guilt

because on paper it's so great,

but here I am exhausted, with anxiety,

and I feel guilty for it.

It drives me nuts.

Then I feel guilty for feeling guilty for feeling guilty.

- Can it be that today, I don't feel great inside?

Where did you get the message that certain forms of pain

are more valid or allowable?

(upbeat music)

Hi, welcome.

I'm Dr. Ramani.

Kyle, welcome to my virtual office.

It's so nice to meet you.

- Thank you.

I'm glad I'm here, I need it.

- How are you feeling?

Then also tell me what you mean by, "I need it."

- How am I feeling?

Well, I'm tired today,

but that's just cause I'm alive and awake.

So if I'm awake, I'm tired.

When I say I need it, I am not new to therapy, okay?

I've been to therapy.

I just haven't been to therapy in a while.

For the first time in my life,

I'm in therapy for reasons

that I haven't been to therapy for.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm.

- So part of me is irritated with myself

that I have not been more on top of this.

I feel like I'm a little late to the game.

I know I can catch up,

but that's what I mean when I say I need it.

- Now you shared a couple things I want to follow up on,

but you started by saying, "When I'm up, I'm tired."

How long have you been experiencing

this level of fatigue or tiredness?

- Well, I was born in 1986 so probably around there.

- Oh for your whole life, okay.

- My whole life.

I've been to sleep doctors and other doctors

and gotten all the tests and done all the diets.

I could easily sleep 12 hours a day

and take a nap in the middle of the day.

Anything less than that is me pushing through.

Obviously I cannot run the life I have for myself

on 14 to 16 hours of sleep a day.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

- So, yeah. I'm tired all the time.

I know that that impacts my mental health,

but there's just no way around it that I have found.

- So your whole life, like even in childhood, adolescence,

you've had this history of this long-term fatigue

and you've seen medical professionals,

mental health professionals, sleep experts,

and none of them have really shined light

on what this is about.

- The conclusion is that I have Crohn's disease.

I had a surgery that took out part of my stomach,

so I don't absorb nutrients- - Got it.

- I need.

I was also diagnosed with depression

when I was nine years old,

and when that is rearing its head,

my side effect is more exhaustion.

- Yeah, yeah.

So I think it's a combination

of chronic long-term depression and chronic Crohn's disease.

- Okay, so Crohn's disease being an auto-immune condition

and it really, in essence,

also is sort of your body attacking itself.

It can also be made worse.

Auto-immune conditions can be

made significantly more severe or debilitating

if a person's under stress,

because they're mediated by the immune system.

In many ways the stress is sort of like

the puppet master of the immune system.

And on top of that, you have depression.

How long have you had a history of depression?

- Well I was diagnosed with the depression at nine.

I've been diagnosed many times since, throughout adulthood.

I think that the true first symptoms of...

high levels of anxiety,

a lot of thought processes and cognitive distortions,

I suppose there would be,

were probably around six or seven years old.

Then it finally came to a head when I was nine

and my parents were like,

we gotta get this kid to therapy.

- Mm-hmm.

Thank God they did.

And I'm medicated, I'm on 40 milligrams of Prozac

and I've been on many antidepressants over the years.

- Over your lifetime, the therapy, the medications,

has it helped with depression?

- Oh yeah.

- Yeah, okay.

Absolutely. I mean, helped is an understatement.

- Okay. Mm-hmm.

- Therapy and meds are the reason

that I can do this mock therapy session.

- Given how much fatigue you've been experiencing,

your history of Crohn's disease,

and your history of depression,

how does all of this come together

to affect your day-to-day functioning?

- Well, that's a long question-or a long answer.

One thing that is new to me is

the guilt I have for feeling this way.

- Mm-hmm.

- I have a fabulous life, oh my gosh.

The idea that I would complain

or think negatively about my life

sends me into a tremendous amount of guilt

because on paper it's so great.

But here I am, exhausted with anxiety for

the second real time in my life,

the first time I was six years old,

and I feel guilty for it.

It drives me nuts.

Then I feel guilty for feeling guilty for feeling guilty.

It just continues on.

- Right, so in essence, you feel guilty

for having a normal reaction to your life?

- I guess I don't look at it as super normal

because I don't have the stressors

that I hear other people have.

I hear about stress.

I hear about trauma.

I hear about what people are going through,

and I'm not going through that.

Yet there's a part of me mentally that responds

as though I were.

Even saying that out loud, honestly, Dr. Ramani,

I'm like, ugh, God, like, get over yourself.

Like, you don't have anything to be upset about.

- Okay, so...

do you feel guilty when you feel hungry?

- No.

- Okay, but you have access to food,

you have a kitchen I'm guessing,

you have money to buy food.

So why should you ever feel hungry?

- Ah, I don't know.

I don't know.

To me, that's not comparing apples to apples.

'Cause my internal monologue is,

how dare you feel like you have something to be upset about

when you really can't identify anything to be upset about.

- Okay, I understand what you're saying,

but you do you see what I'm saying?

You have a natural experience of hunger

and you allow yourself to feel it,

and you're like, well, better get something to eat

'cause I'm hungry, and you don't judge that.

But you have set up in your mind this idea,

what I'm hearing, is that it's almost as though

you're viewing stressors or misfortunes

or problems quantitatively.

And only if you get over a certain level,

is a person allowed to feel bad.

- Yeah.

- What's the number, Kyle?

- Yeah, you nailed it. - 1-100 scale.

- You nailed it.

You sound like my dad.

My dad has told me, Kyle, you're the guy who goes,

well, I only lost one leg, I have another one.

He's like, you're allowed to be upset that you lost one leg.

You nailed it, you nailed it.

- But you see what you're doing Kyle, even here.

It's like, I lost the leg.

Can't it be that I got two legs

and I got a functioning body,

but today I don't feel great inside.

It's as though you require, or you believe

that there are certain valid reasons to feel bad,

and if you don't have a valid reason,

then it's somehow shameful or wrong.

- Yes.

- So then you feel guilty, yeah?

- Yeah, that's exactly correct.

That's exactly correct.

I didn't have the awareness of it

going into this mock therapy session.

So I guess just for time's sake,

what do I do now with that awareness?

I'm in this session, you provide it for me, I get it.

Sometimes that's enough.

I leave, I go home and I go, oh my gosh.

I don't allow myself to feel normal feelings.

I judge the feelings I have unless they are

compared to something to warrant those feelings in my head.

- Yeah, I wanna ask you though, I wanna understand,

the only way to really fully understand the tree

is to understand its roots, right?

What do you think the roots of this are?

Where did you get the message

that certain forms of pain are more valid

or allowable than others?

- I assume somewhere in my childhood (laughs).

- Right.

- I can't recall something

right off the top of my head.

I also think it's a symptom

of the nature of some of the work that I do at MedCircle.

I get a lot of emails from people sharing their lives.

I am so thankful that people feel comfortable enough

to do that.

But I don't know how well-equipped I am

to go through an inbox every day

of people being abused,

people dealing with suicidal ideation,

people struggling with children who are struggling.

That's a lot for me to take on,

and so after I read all that all day,

and then I go, oh poor Kyle,

you live in a nice apartment and you have a great dog

and you're healthy, but you're tired,

and that's what's giving you anxiety.

You don't have the right to be tired

because we just got an email from Mrs. Miller

who is struggling with her two kids' drug addiction.

- So in a way, Kyle, you're sort of your own perpetrator.

- Hmm.

- What I'm hearing in you is interesting.

It's something I actually hear.

As you know, from looking at my website before you came in,

a lot of the work I do

is in this area called narcissistic abuse.

Helping people who are going through relationships

with difficult, demanding,

and often quite judgemental people.

But it's almost like you're in an abusive relationship

with yourself.

The people who are in these relationships

I tend to work with,

they invalidate their partner's emotion and say,

what do you got to complain about?

You know what, why are you so sensitive?

Why are you getting so difficult, why are you being so...

you're acting like a child.

So they invalidate the emotion of their partner

who's merely having an experience and they judge them.

You're kind of a one-stop shop here Mr. Kittleson,

because you've sort of done it all in your same person.

You have a part of you that gaslights yourself.

- You're right.

- There's this interesting dichotomy within you.

One of the healthiest places we can get a person to

is where they don't judge their own emotion

because emotion is like air temperature,

stand outside long enough, it's gonna change.

It passes.

But with emotion,

if we judge the emotional state we're in and shame it,

try to wall it off, it will come back and bite us.

If we don't allow it to be expressed

or someone else doesn't allow it to be expressed,

again, we wall it off.

Then we have all these compartmentalized parts of ourselves

and we don't become a whole authentic person.

We're almost our own worst enemy at those times.

What we're then doing is, we're deriving our sense

of how we're even allowed to feel from the world.

In essence, we've outsourced ourselves.

- Hmm.

- I'm wondering for you,

can I ask you, are you in a relationship?

- I'm dating someone.

- Tell me about this person you're dating.

- I actually told him about you a while ago,

and I said, yeah, I ended it.

I asked for your opinion and you said,

it seems a little quick, harsh,

and now we're seeing each other again and it's been great.

- Okay.

What do you think your experience, as a gay man,

and it shapes the process of development so differently,

to be a boy.

I think those journeys are still very difficult,

but mercifully we're having more open discourse,

but for you, there was a coming out journey.

I'm wondering how much you see a connection

between any of the experiences you have

in terms of your self-judgment,

the judgment of your emotion,

this dichotomized self we see in you

and even your history of depression

and how that might line up with your process of coming out.

- Wow.

Woo, geez.

There is probably a part of me

that expects more of myself because I'm gay

to prove to everybody else that ha ha ha, joke's on you.

You thought I wasn't going to amount to X, Y, and Z,

and I did that plus more.

- [Dr. Ramani] Mm-hmm.

- So when not in that state,

if it's anything less than like 10 out of 10,

the self-judgment starts.

I think probably when I was 22, 23,

I'm 35 now.

I had some, what is that called, Dr. Ramani,

this is an over simplification,

but it's when gay people don't like themselves

for being gay.

- Self-loathing.

- Self-loathing, yeah, the self (indistinct).

There was probably some of that.

I don't even need to say probably, there was that.

I remember telling my friend, she asked me,

if you could take a pill to be straight, would you take it?

I was like right now, God, every morning.

That'd be so much easier.

I was in my early 20s, I was an adult.

Now I would not do that.

- Right.

- But that's where I came from, if that helps,

if that gives you an answer.

- It helps a lot, because if I could take a pill

and not be gay,

inherently negate part of my authentic self, right?

- Yes.

- For you that compartmentalization has been there.

Like you said, you've gone through your process.

You've integrated your identity.

You're clear on that.

To be a gay man,

that's this you,

this isn't an "oh if I could make this go away"

because there was that self-loathing.

Again, that self-loathing

is magnified through the lens of society.

The self-loathing doesn't come up from anywhere.

It comes from the biases that society has

against any individual that's a member of one or more

marginalized groups.

That internalization of that is such a quiet process.

Sometimes we're not even aware of it.

Then we may turn it inward, judge our emotions,

judge ourselves, label ourselves negatively,

and we'll think this is all an internal process.

When in some ways that process is society.

We internalize these messages from society

and we think they're our own.

- Mm-hmm.

- So it does make me wonder how much you

judging something as integral and human as your own emotions

is sort of a lifetime of having judged yourself

and who you are.

- Yeah.

I mean, the short answer is that is a large chunk of it.

- Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.

So in our work together,

I hope that we can talk about this more.

That you find spaces where you feel

that you can be you authentically, genuinely,

and not feel that you're being judged

or valued conditionally.

But also Kyle, there's a reality to this,

the nature of your work,

where you are reading difficult stories from people's lives.

There's an actual toll to that.

It's actually called compassion fatigue.

People who have to compassion a lot, you wear out.

No more than any other muscle.

If you were lifting stuff all day

or digging ditches all day or fixing roofs all day,

you would be wearing out different parts of you.

In the case of what you're doing,

reading these really difficult stories

that people are sharing with you in a vulnerable manner

is having two impacts on you.

One, that compassion piece,

but the second, it's activating this ancient shame for you.

- Wow, yeah.

Wow. Okay. Yeah.

I mean (sighs), you're really good.

You're really good.

You're really good, Dr. Ramani.

You're really good.

- That's good, thank you.

- That was really good.

That was really good.

I'm a little irritated, to be honest, 'cause it was so good.

(sighs) Really good. Thank you.

I don't even want to talk about it anymore.

- [Dr. Ramani] Okay.

- Yeah, that was really good.

(uplifting music)

I have questions about all that.

- Okay.

- About our therapy session.

- Awesome.

- One, how much of...

we've known each other for years now.

How much of that history

did we have impact this type of session?

- I'm going to be frank with you, Kyle.

Again, because I was doing a mock therapy session,

I was really trying, obviously I had pieces in here,

but I also, even with the little bit you gave me,

like for example, I was trying to set it,

I know you're a gay man

but I didn't want it to be presumptive

since we were sort of laying it out

as though it's the first time I'm meeting you

and all of that.

But not as much as you would think.

What you gave me was enough.

- And what did I give you?

- You told me how you're feeling.

You told me how you've been feeling like this

for a long time.

You gave me a glimpse into your mental health history

and your physical health history,

and how they kind of come together.

You let me know that you obviously had solicitous parents

who encouraged therapy,

but then you really were able to pivot into this space

of being able to talk about the guilt

and then ultimately the shame you felt

about having any

negative thoughts about your life

in light of the fact that people have it so much worse.

This kind of...

it's a very...stoic kind of,

who the heck am I to complain when people

have it so much worse?

I have to say, when I hear that, it always concerns me

because at some level I often think to myself,

this person is going to be perceived

as so strong by everyone.

Like, you're right, what do you have to complain about?

But, I have to tell you,

I once read this book by a woman named Dr. Edith Eger,

and she did such a beautiful job.

She's really like a very female parallel voice

to Victor Frankl,

and in her book, it's called "The Gift,"

she writes about this idea of,

so often we feel like we either don't get

to complain about our lot in life

because some people have it worse,

or she gave a great example

of a person getting aggravated at someone,

like a therapist getting aggravated at someone

for complaining, thinking,

how could you be complaining about this?

Thinking 'cause a therapist two hours before her

might've been hearing someone with a much worse problem.

What Dr. Eger says is that the therapist has to be

sort of masterful

at being able to...

At being able to understand that

everyone's crisis is their crisis

from a subjective point of view.

For one person, not being able

to get to their nail salon when it could open

felt tragic to them.

For another person, processing the suicide of their child,

and you're like, can these two things be compared?

Dr. Eger would say yes, because in both cases,

that person had a negative mood experience

and we don't get to judge it.

I have to say her writing has been quite influential for me.

And again, builds on Dr. Frankel's work as well.

So it's this idea that we don't get to judge,

not as therapists,

nor do we get to judge ourselves as individuals.

Your pain is your pain.

So that theme really struck me hard about you.

Then I wanted to get to the core

of where that came from,

and that's where your history came in.

I do know you're gay.

I knew that very much of the people who have statuses,

who maintain, who hold roles,

I should say role statuses, that are marginalized by society

are often the ones who judge themselves most harshly

because society already does that for you.

That societal judgment almost passively gets internalized.

As a result, people who live

within marginalized roles and statuses

are more likely to self-pathologize than other groups.

- Yeah. You really nailed it.

You really nailed it.

When you tied it all together at the end,

I felt all of it being tied together in my brain.

- Hmm, okay.

- That's how in line it was

with what was going on in my head, what you were saying.

Which really made me feel heard.

I think that was my reaction,

was not just as a realization of where these feelings

are coming from,

but also, oh my gosh,

this woman in 10 minutes

understood what I was talking about.

I've been to a lot of therapy, Dr. Ramani.

Those moments that I just had with you truly in 15 minutes,

I don't have those every therapy session.

- That's good.

- It's a build.

I don't have any good questions (laughs).

I probably have some stupid questions

- There are no stupid questions.

But Bridget, are there any good questions

I can ask about this?

I'm too emotional right now.

- You know Kyle, first of all, thank you.

I'm glad we were able to do something

that would teach people.

Let me tell you though,

part of what I think we were able to do here,

that I hope and wish more people would get in therapy.

That's that idea

of understanding those internalized societal messages.

I think that too often therapy doesn't integrate that.

We're so focused on the closed system of the individual,

that we don't weigh in

on what structural systemic issues do to a person

and how that can actually be a major driver

to our mental health.

One of the biggest problems to me in psychotherapy

is the unwillingness to consider all of that.

The outsideness of it all.

Listen, I practice in Los Angeles,

and a significant proportion of people

bring at least one kind of marginalized status.

Whether a gender, race, ethnicity, whatever.

It's not like I'm saying that that's

the sole explanatory mechanism,

but it really does help sometimes

understand that volley between in and out.

I think a lot of people don't think of it that way.

Why a lot of people don't,

is they're almost afraid of feeling like

they're blaming the world for their problems,

or they're putting themselves in a victimized stance.

At no point were you doing that, if anything,

you were really almost self-shaming, self-harming

and self-gaslighting.

So it's to sort of break you out of that cycle,

because for me the win with you would be

for you to give permission to yourself,

to be able to be okay with not being okay.

So that you'd get back to okay a lot more quickly.

This idea that my feeling sad and my feeling tired

doesn't get to happen because someone else

lost a child or lost their job,

it's comparing to...

it's not even apples and oranges.

It's like...hammers and cows.

There's literally no...they're not even fruit.

They're not even common.

- Right, right.

- I think that one of the problems is,

is that we have this sort of intersubjectivity.

Like, I can only judge my experience

on the basis of someone else's experience.

We humans do that.

We're a tribal species.

We tend to look outside of us.

But it's also being able to know that

no more than I judge myself,

for example, let's say it's a warm day and I feel cold.

It's tempting to say, oh gosh,

there's something wrong with me, I'm cold.

I'm cold!

We tend to be more comfortable

doing it with physical states.

I'm cold, I'm hungry.

That sort of stuff we don't judge,

but when it comes to our emotions, we judge.

That's what I would love for-

if we had worked together, what we would keep working on.

(uplifting music)

A few takeaways, Kyle, would be, number one,

is pay attention to how you talk to yourself.

If someone was talking to you

the way you were talking to yourself,

you'd be like, hey, hello, you need to step back

because this isn't okay.

- Yeah, except way meaner.

- Yeah.

Most of us accept from ourselves far, far worse

than we would ever expect from someone else.

Part of this becomes mindful self-monitoring

of your own self-talk,

Which is never easy to do 'cause the self-talk

is such a passive experience that's internal to us.

I'd love for you to spend more time

being more mindful and aware

on how you talk to yourself.

Number two, I'd love for you to do

almost like a one or two week experiment,

where you honor your moods and be with them.

So when your body is telling you you're tired,

instead of saying, oh my God, Kyle, what's wrong with you?

So many people have it worse, say,

almost talk to your body.

Maybe not do it in front of other people,

but honor your body and say, you're tired?

Let's go rest.

And take care of you.

Instead of yelling at you,

take care of you.

Let's go take rest.

I think after a while, once your body

and your psyche

connect and feel confident, like our host has got us,

we'll be okay, we know we're gonna be taken care of,

together, you might actually feel better.

Does that make sense?

- Yes.

- If know I'm going to someone's house

and they're gonna be like, you want to take some rest,

you want to take a shower, you want something to eat?

I feel taken care of.

But if they're like,

you're gonna do everything on my agenda,

and I'm gonna wake you up at four in the morning,

and then I'm gonna make you go to bed at 10.

We're gonna only talk about what I want, eat what I want.

I'll be like, I don't want to be here,

and I'd feel tense and upset.

Well, I want you to be a better host.

I want you to just sort of work on some of that

very simple self-compassion, listening to yourself,

because I'm hearing you won't take advantage of that.

Like you won't say, oh I'm gonna say in bed for two weeks.

I think you'll say, I got my rest, I'm good.

And you know that you'll honor your need for rest

when you may need it at a later time.

Those would be two things

that I'd really want you to work on.

Again, especially that mindfulness.

Staying in the moment, being with your feelings

and not judging them.

As a third enhancement, you may want to consider journaling.

Journaling can take a lot of forms.

Sometimes people are like,

I am not writing dear diary every day.

I'm not telling you to do that.

Sometimes it's as simple,

I tell some of my clients,

you don't feel like journaling every day,

give yourself a little rating.

I actually have an app

and it goes off at whatever time it goes off.

I can actually rate my moods,

if that makes sense.

I can rate my...did I have a good day?

Did I have a bad day.

Am I tired? Am I sad?

Am I this? Am I that?

It gives me a chance to just touch base

and over time I get data.

I can look at that data over time and say,

oh, wow, that was a bad week, or this is a better week,

or what was it about that day that was better or worse.

Keeping that either through a mood tracking app

or jotting a few things down,

watching the ebbs and the flows of time,

that can help too.

- Well, just so happens,

I started bullet journaling yesterday.

So here we go. - Oh good! Perfect!

I'll incorporate the other two.

And this has been fabulous.

I mean, thanks for the therapy, Dr. Ramani.

- You got it.

My pleasure.

I'm glad it was helpful.

- You can watch more with Dr. Ramani

right here on YouTube or medcircle.com.

I'm Kyle Kittleson.

Remember, whatever you're going through,

you got this.

Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below

for more information on how to access this full series,

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a MedCircle doctor a question directly,

you can.

Learn how by visiting the links in the description below.

(upbeat music)

