- I have pretty much been medicated my entire life,

from the age of nine 'til today.

I've had moments where,

for a multitude of reasons have gone off my meds,

and that has always resulted in a relapse.

I mean, it is the deepest, darkest,

I mean, life doesn't even make sense

when I get into that deep, deep space.

- I wonder what it's like

just to put that on the table to say,

we're gonna take a deeper look at this depression,

that this is what you wanna work on for your benefit.

What do you notice inside just as we get clear

that that's what we're gonna work on?

Hi, Kyle, what's the problem you'd like to work on today?

- Well, I was diagnosed with depression

when I was nine years old.

You think we would have figured it out by now, I'm 35.

I have pretty much been medicated my entire life

from the age of nine 'til today.

I've had moments where,

for a multitude of reasons,

have gone off my meds,

and that has always resulted in what I,

and at the time my providers,

would consider a relapse.

I never took myself to the hospital.

I was always able to find a doctor

who could see me right away

but it was, I mean, if I couldn't have done that,

I would have driven to the hospital.

I mean, it is the deepest, darkest...

I mean, life doesn't even make sense

when I get into that deep, deep space.

So that's happened probably, not probably,

it's happened three times as an adult,

each time corresponding to going off meds.

I'm pretty good with my depression right now.

I had a relapse, so to speak,

a minor one in May

when I was transitioning medication,

and that was disaster, not great.

So I guess, but I bring all that up to say,

I am still not...

I've still not been okay with or accepted

that I will probably be medicated

for the rest of my life for this depression.

I don't like doing that.

I don't like, every morning,

I have to take 40 milligrams of Prozac,

and when I take it, I go,

oh man, I wish I didn't have to take this.

And then when I feel good, my brain still says,

you got this,

like, I can do it.

I don't need this med.

But then the logical part of my brain reminds me,

if you go off of this,

in two to six weeks,

you're gonna regret it.

And I'm grappling with this.

I can treat it, I can manage it,

I know exactly what I need to do,

and I will do it,

because the alternative

is not anything I'm willing to do.

But oh my gosh, am I gonna be 95 years old,

and then taking this pill still every morning,

I don't know.

- Yeah, so I hear a couple of different things.

So, the depression has been an issue in the past,

it's not kind of rearing its head right now,

but concerns about medication

and whether or not

you want to be on medication long-term

and whether that's an option for you.

And, we can talk about medications

a little bit separately

in regard to when people do wanna try

and taper off medications,

unfortunately, they often come off very, very quickly,

and statistically people do better

coming off over like a year,

because if we think about the fact

that it takes four to six weeks

to have the full effect of a dose change,

then it's going to take that much time

with every dose decrease

for your brain to kind of recalibrate.

So we can really throw people into withdrawal

and pop their symptoms,

and you're mentioning there's some real conflict

over being on medication.

And so that's something that we can certainly look at.

I'm wondering what makes sense to you

as far as looking at the medications

versus looking at kind of the origins of the depression,

and maybe getting specific about

when your last episode was,

to be able to see if we can get underneath.

But we can take either path

that sounds right for you.

- Well, I think I'm the second path

of the origins of depression

sound more in line with what I would want.

- Okay, yeah, great.

And so let's make sure that we do what you want.

This therapy is yours,

and that we can really make sure that

we're focusing on your goals,

and so we can talk about meds,

but being able to understand what happens

is such a key piece in balance with the medication,

so that we can work on

how you might operate in the world

that might contribute to the depression.

And so we're clear, we're gonna work on

kind of getting to know about this depression

and how it affects you,

and maybe the origins of it.

And before we even get started,

I wonder what it's like,

just to put that on the table to say,

we're gonna take a deeper look at this depression,

that this is what you wanna work on for your benefit.

What do you notice inside just as we get clear

that that's what we're gonna work on?

- Oh, excitement.

And I know that that's probably an obscure answer,

I get excited for this,

because this is like

I've had this little ugly pet

follow me around my whole life.

I mean, since I was a young, young child,

five, six years old, I remember this feeling,

and so it's always here.

Whether I am medicated or not medicated, it's there.

So when I get to sit across from somebody like you

and say, all right, let's look at this ugly pet,

because I don't look at it that much, Dr. Lamb, I don't.

I work, and I see my friends,

and I play with my dog, I do my life

with this ugly pet.

So to have this space

where we're gonna actually look at this ugly pet

and see what we can do,

I get excited about that.

- I'm glad to hear it,

because for some people coming in, in therapy,

it can be really anxiety-provoking,

they may not wanna look, and so...

- Yeah, no, that's not me.

I've been in therapy since nine years old, I love it.

I get on the couch,

I'm like, hey, what's your name,

let's do it, let's get into it, I love it.

- Wonderful, wonderful.

So could we look at a specific example

of your last kind of relapse into depression,

what was going on,

and just start to get some details around it

so we can see if we can formulate

an understanding of what happens for you.

- So it happened in May,

ironically during Mental Health Month,

and it probably started a little before that

and went past May,

but May was really the big chunk of it.

A lot of things were happening.

One, Mental Health Month

is a big month for me professionally,

so we were very busy,

me and the whole team here at MedCircle.

I literally just now I was like,

right, we're doing MedCircle right now,

I'm not in therapy.

And so I was just busier than I normally was.

I don't know why.

Every year, whether I'm independent of medication,

I get depressed around that time, every year.

I mean, and I don't even anticipate it,

so it's not like my brain's going,

here it comes,

I just move through my life and I go,

wait, why is this happening?

Why is this happening?

And I go, oh yeah, it's that time of the year again.

It's like reverse seasonal depression or something.

The spring comes, and I just,

for that period of time.

Now, my birthday's in April,

I've had therapists tell me,

it's probably 'cause of your birthday,

and I really don't think it is,

but maybe it is.

And the other big catalyst...

And then I went off my meds,

I was switching meds.

I went from Prozac to something else.

That didn't work,

and I went into something else,

and there were gaps in there

that I wasn't on meds at all,

and that was a big catalyst.

And then the other part was,

I don't know what happened,

if all my friends got together and said,

let's all have a problem and bring it to Kyle,

but every single person I knew, it felt like,

was coming to me with huge issues.

I'm getting divorced,

I have a chronic illness,

my husband, XYZ.

I mean, major, major, big life issues.

And I gave them everything.

I go, here, you have all of me.

I got on flights,

I gave them everything.

I was like, here's my time, my energy,

my money, my resources, everything.

So when all of that came together

at the end of May,

I remember telling my dad and my dad called me

and he goes, how are you,

and I said, I'm not gonna help anybody anymore.

I'm done, I have nothing else to give.

I don't care who calls me,

what the problem is, I'm done.

I have nothing left to give anybody.

And then of course I'm like,

unless you need something to dad

then I'll help you.

But I just I couldn't do it.

I was drained,

I had nothing, I had nothing.

- And so is this a pattern for you?

- No, no, I don't think so.

And I am aware enough hopefully to know that there,

I'm sure I have many patterns

that I'm not aware of,

but I never recall in my life

giving myself so much to people

that I am drained.

I don't recall that.

- Got it, so is it accurate to say that

in other times in your life

you would set more boundaries

or let people know when you didn't have...

- Yes.

- So, just differentiating,

you normally set better boundaries as opposed to,

I don't really set boundaries,

but I just got a tsunami of needs...

- Normally I said,

well, now that you're asking that question,

I over the last two years

have really made an effort

to be incredibly empathic,

and I think that has a lot to do with my job

because I see it, I hear it, all of that,

so I'm trying to be really empathic.

And perhaps, the pendulum swung

too far to one side where,

and I'm not saying what I did is only empathy,

but it might be in the same house as other

emotions that may be good in smaller doses,

but all at once for me is a debilitating.

- Absolutely, I think for anyone that when,

it sounds like if I'm hearing you correctly,

that during this time

you put everyone else

ahead of your own needs.

- Yes, yes.

- And is that a pattern for you?

Is that a pattern for you?

- I don't think so.

I really think if you asked my friends,

they'd be like, nah, he's kinda like...

- He's pretty good at taking care of himself.

- I don't think so.

But I did have a psychiatrist tell me once

I was dating this guy who had a lot of issues.

And then, that sounded mean

we all have issues, but...

- But he had a lot them.

- Yeah, and I've also before my current career,

I was an animal trainer

and this therapist of mindset, Kyle,

you naturally care for things.

You have a whole job dedicated caring for animals

who are helpless.

I mean, they depend and rely on,

and now you're this relationship

where this person

is depending and relying on you.

You may wanna look at why you are finding yourself

in these scenarios and situations

where everyone's depending and relying on you.

And I said, yeah, maybe that,

well, and here I am years later in this...

During may or during that time period

where I was in that position again.

And I have control of all of it, Dr. Lamb,

it's not as though I could say,

I could have said, no,

I can't do that for you, I'm sorry,

I said yes to everything.

- Yeah, and so that we don't beat you up about that,

'cause part of that, your language right around,

I have control of this,

sounds a little bit like a self-attack

as if you should have done something differently.

And so I'm wondering if we can come into seriously

and try and understand why.

- Why what?

- Why during this time were your guards down?

Why during this time,

was there a draw to really take care of others,

at the expense of you?

- I know why, I know why.

I haven't thought about this.

I really, truly, truly, truly had not thought about this.

This is my theory at least

because then I didn't have to take care of myself.

If I'm taking care of everybody else,

then I'll have to think about me.

I don't have to think about,

I just moved to a new city.

Working remote has really taken a toll on me,

this is not meant,

I'm meant to sit in a room with you, Dr. Lamb,

not like this.

And if I can be a part of everyone else's problems,

then I don't have to look at my problems.

- Beautiful, so we get really clear,

that one of the primary mechanisms that you may use

to avoid feeling sadness, grief, over loneliness,

everything that came with new place,

COVID restrictions, all of this stuff,

you can be distracted,

you can avoid yourself by taking care of others

and what an altruistic thing to do,

but at the neglect of you.

And so we just start to see,

that there's something about sitting with

and exploring, and feeling

what you were feeling at that time.

Med changes that weren't working,

that's gonna bring up feelings towards the providers

that were made the recommendations

and the failed recommendations.

So there was something about being present

with what you were feeling

or what you were going through,

that whether consciously

or unconsciously made you anxious

and how'd you go take care of everyone else

to keep all of these painful feelings at bay.

So should we take a look,

at what these painful feelings were

that were coming up?

And as you think about it now,

what feelings come up as you reflect on

how bad it was in May

and what you were going through.

- Well, I hate to be the person that rebuttals this

without giving you an answer.

- No please.

- Part of what I was feeling was,

I recognize now we're due to me being

in this very deep state of depression.

And so it's hard for me to say to you, oh,

I was feeling disconnected from my family

because okay I was,

but I wasn't disconnected from my family.

I was depressed.

Does that make sense?

So to me like the depressed feelings

are kind of fake feelings.

That's how it kind of how I look at them...

- Super important to differentiate, absolutely.

So that you....

Well, there's a couple pieces here.

So there's a huge difference between feeling

or being in a state of depression

where our thoughts are hopeless,

we feel helpless,

everything is the worst.

That's very different than I'm connected with my family,

but I can't get on a plane and go see them,

and I've got feelings about that

or whatever the case may have been.

So it can become a bit of a chicken and the egg situation,

so that the depressed state

keeps us from feeling what we're feeling

and that this can get muddled.

People often don't separate out sadness and grief

from depression and they're very, very different,

and I think that's what you're highlighting, right?

Is that when you feel depressed

and when you're in a depressed state,

which in our model, would say,

this is a defensive collapse around real feelings

that were coming up after a year of being isolated,

having to navigate all of these changes, a new move.

And while you were connected with your family,

I'm curious how connected you were.

Because I think this is another place

where we can kind of sneaky self-attack ourselves,

like, well, I wasn't disconnected,

I was surrounded by people,

but if I felt completely alone with those people,

or if I wasn't really seen by those people,

if my needs weren't actually met,

I'm gonna have feelings about that,

and then I might blame myself,

well, they were there

but my needs weren't getting met.

So, I was alone and I did have feelings about it.

And so I'm curious what your environment

in regard to connection,

not just connecting to take care of others,

but you being seen.

In the midst of these med changes,

feeling really awful,

who was there to see you, to support you?

- Well, I mean, my best friend lives across the street.

So, he was certainly there,

and he was the only person I really told this to.

And when I told him,

I didn't even tell him the way I'm telling you,

I told him like, look,

we've known each other for 20 plus years,

I'm depressed.

Now I've told you,

I don't need you to do anything,

I don't need you to help me,

I don't need you to like make me dinner.

I'm just telling you,

this is why I'm isolating

or not wanting to hang out or whatever.

- It's really interesting with your best friend of 20 years

that there's a part of you that

really wanted to make sure

that there was no opportunity for him

to take care of you, to support you.

You needed even at moment to take care of him.

Well, in that moment,

you created an opportunity for you to take care of him

by telling him I'm depressed,

but I don't need anything,

let me take care of you

by telling you I have no needs.

- Yeah, that's true, yeah, geez.

Okay, yeah, that's true.

Yeah, no, you're right.

- And is that common for you

as far as like being potentially in dire need?

- Yeah, it is.

- Or no?

- It is common for me to handle it myself,

whatever it is, it's uncommon for me...

- Is that a problem?

- Maybe sometimes, you know, maybe sometimes it is.

- Was it a problem in May?

- Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.

In some ways it was the cause of the problems,

and then it was the prolonging of the problems

'cause looking back Dr. Lamb, I know,

well, I was just about to do it again,

I was just about to say all the things

that I could have done differently to handle this.

- You could have done to take care of yourself

and not be a burden for anyone else.

- Right, right, right.

I even, this is so... I even...

So I live in Phoenix.

I even like intensely looked at moving to Texas,

and my whole family is in Arizona.

And I have a lot of friends in Arizona and I was like,

this isn't working,

I need to go do my own thing and move in my own space.

I'm gonna go look at Texas,

and then I found it was the mosquito capital of the country,

and I was like, well, I'm not moving to Dallas,

but I really heavily looked at that.

It's not like I had the thought,

I mean, I went online,

I called people I knew in Texas.

I was like, let's look at me moving to Texas,

and this was in my deepest, darkest spot I was doing.

- How beautiful to recognize,

more parts of this pattern

where when you're feeling poorly,

that there's a part of you that says

I don't need, I don't deserve,

I don't want help, I don't wanna be a burden.

And it can come out in lots of different ways.

I can do this on my own,

but how does that hurt you?

- Well, I don't think I can really do it on my own at least,

and have the results that I do want.

So that's how it hurts me.

- Is that a problem of performance

or a problem meaning,

I could be wrong here,

but something about the way you said that

sounded like an attack on you,

like, I can't do it on my own

if I could, I should.

- Oh, right.

- Different from, as a human,

when I'm suffering and in need,

I shouldn't want or need this human desire

to be connected with and taken care of.

That there's real barriers to being seen,

to being taken care of or letting people in

to be able to support you and take care of you.

- Yeah.

- What's coming up as I say that,

what do you notice inside?

- Well, I notice now I'm overwhelmed

because I believe this to be true

and this being this kind of,

well, I mean, this is kind of self sabotage, so to speak.

And now I'm overwhelmed because I get to that point,

which a lot of people do and myself included in therapy,

where I go, great,

now we've uncovered all of this,

now what do I do?

It's like, what do I do with all of this?

- Yeah and so great to notice,

that as we start to notice something,

a mechanism inside,

I would in my terminology, I call it a defense.

As this defensive avoidance,

when you're feeling really poorly comes in,

pushing people away potentially

to get the care that you might want or need,

you can then attack yourself for doing it or jump to,

okay, how do I fix this?

But if we slow the process down

and we just get clear that

because first we have to really orient to the problem,

that these depressive episodes can come up,

hard feelings can come up,

and that the way that you've learned

to operate in the world, likely for good reason,

we don't learn this out of the womb,

we learn to not be a burden,

to take care of ourselves,

to be able to say, I'm good.

You know what? I'm so good,

I'm gonna go to Texas 'cause I don't need any y'all.

- And you know what?

You know where I went when I graduated college from Arizona?

I went to an island in Hawaii.

And sometimes I think about that and I go, man,

you really wanted some space.

And in the context of this conversation,

I think there was a part of it that I was like,

okay, I'm good, I don't need anybody.

- So this is a super important point about our defenses

is that not only do they make sense,

if we learned it's not okay to have needs

or to need to be taken care of,

or that we're seen as a burden,

we learned to not do that,

and then we get wedded to it and we get proud of it.

You're self-sufficient,

you can go to an island in Hawaii

and you can take care of yourself.

I got this, and you do,

and we don't have to demo everything that you learned,

it's not a complete demo.

But can we also create space that maybe

part of that way of operating,

when it's rigid,

when there isn't choice around it,

when it's unconscious and potentially impulsive

can be really destructive to you

and can keep you alone

and keep you hidden from other people

so they never really know how you're really doing

or know how to intervene to support you.

And so this is at the very beginning,

when we start therapy,

we have to get clear what's the problem,

what are the things that

how I may be operating

that may be causing problems in my life.

And gosh, as we look at this one,

it sounds as though it's really mixed.

There's a part of you it sounds like,

and correct me if I'm wrong,

that is really proud of your capacity to do this.

- No question, no question.

- I don't need anybody.

- That's right.

- And so then we come back to the question,

is it a problem?

- Is that a problem?

- Is it a problem?

- It is a problem,

I think for me to move through the world

with that type of mindset,

and the problem is that it keeps me from the potential.

- The potential of what?

- Anything, the potential of getting better faster,

the potential of being happier,

the potential of having closer relationships,

of showing vulnerability, all of those things.

- Absolutely, yeah.

That when we operate in this way,

which is super common, it's protective,

but it can have catastrophic effects on our relationships,

our capacity to connect, and our sense of gosh,

being able to rely on anyone, even a therapist.

Because if you come into therapy and you're good,

you could stay on that island on the couch.

And so before diving into all the feelings

and all that kinda stuff,

we have to get clear, what's an operation,

what's the root cause that may be perpetuating

some of this depression

and get clear, is this a problem

that I really wanna work on

knowing that there's a part of it

that I really wanna hold on to.

- Yeah, yeah, good.

Damn, really good, obviously.

- What do you notice inside

as we start to just identify this as,

I'd call it right now a potential problem,

'cause there's a part of you that's really,

wants to stay on that island.

What do you notice coming up inside?

Even feelings that come up towards me as I highlight it.

- My feelings are that I,

I don't know if it's a feeling,

but my thoughts are that

I have to go be by myself

and think about all of this

and maybe I shouldn't.

- Ain't that interesting?

Even here with me, as we start to connect

and start to get clear

about what you might wanna work on,

it brings up some feelings about connecting,

could get you anxious and say, okay,

I'm gonna go take this to my island

and go figure this out.

- I know, I really thought I was like, after this,

I have an hour break in my day,

I can go and really think about this by myself.

- You should go do therapy with yourself.

What's it like to just notice that?

- Well, it's kind of funny,

honestly, it's kind of funny.

I guess it's not too surprising

when it's all laid out there,

it's kind of like seeing a completed puzzle

when you didn't think you had all the puzzle pieces.

- And we could see how even here with me,

it could flirt the connection here with me.

- I'm in therapy with you and I'm like, God,

I gotta get rid of the therapist

so I can go think about this.

Yeah, yeah, that's avoidance or is it?

- Yeah, and any sense of what's coming up inside your body

of what you notice

as we're just kind of connecting here

and exploring this together.

Any feelings that come up towards me?

'Cause there's an impulse to get away.

- And I'm not just saying this

to try to be nice to you,

I don't think it's getting away from you,

it's getting away from this conversation.

It's getting away from

these things that are coming up

because there is an ease to living in my boxes

of not letting any one in, I guess.

- Right, yeah, there's an ease to it,

and yet it also can perpetuate that depression

and that isolation and the avoidance.

Because when stuff comes up for you,

there's an impulse to get away

and to potentially push people away.

- Oh yeah, beautiful.

- And any sense of the feeling

inside of you towards me that says step off,

what do you notice inside?

What's the feeling that comes up here towards me?

- Well, my feeling is that you're good.

To me, I'm like, she's doing her job.

- And then there's a part of you that then says,

oh gosh, she could actually get in here.

- Yeah, yeah.

- No, I need to leave.

And so what's that feeling of I need to leave

that comes up here with me?

What's the feeling inside that comes up here towards me,

that's like, don't get too close?

What do you notice inside?

- I don't know that one.

- Would you like to know?

- Of course, yes, I trust you, yes.

- So what's the feeling

that comes up inside here towards me

that wants to push me away?

What feeling do you notice coming up?

- Well, I don't know again, if this is a feeling,

but the thought of I got it from here.

- And if you're setting that boundary with me to say,

I got it from here,

what's the feeling that comes up here towards me?

- That I don't want you to be involved with this

from this point on.

- Any feeling inside towards me?

- I don't... The feeling toward...

- 'Cause that's a thought about what you want to do,

what's the feeling towards me?

If that feeling just comes out here towards me,

if we just let all your feelings be here,

what feelings come up here towards me?

- Well, now I'm feeling aggravated

that I keep getting asked the same question.

I'm like look I don't the feeling,

but now I've gone into aggravated frustration.

- How do you feel that in your body here with me,

if we just let that be present?

- Well, when I said that my face got really hot,

I probably went flush.

- Beautiful, so there's feelings

that come up here towards me

to try and keep me away.

And what's it like to just let that feeling

be present here with me?

- Uncomfortable.

- To be seen for your frustration,

like the frustration that as I approach,

there's a part of you that really wants

to be in therapy to connect,

and there's another part of you

that really wants to push away,

and this is where we start

is just seeing that

so that we don't have a fake therapy

because often people come in

and have really mixed feelings about being seen.

And if your front door is closed,

we can't really go

and take a look at your feelings and figure out,

and so then the work becomes here with you and me

to allow the space that there's a part of you

that wants to connect

and a part of you that wants to keep me at bay.

And that's okay, that's how most of us,

if we actually think about it,

engage in therapy,

we're ambivalent.

But if we don't look, we won't see that.

And then we do all kinds of things

to keep people at bay.

- Thank you for this.

- Absolutely, yes I know I actually have to end.

- We have to go.

Hey, I really appreciate it.

We'll end there and thank you for this doctor.

- Is it okay if even like off the record,

just checking in what that experience was,

this is an experience.

- It was really great

and I'm good and I'm very good and thankful

so I appreciate it.

It was really wonderful,

I'm just in my thoughts right now, so yeah,

and we are over time,

so you go do your thing and thank you, thank you.

- Oh my gosh, no, thank you for being so open and willing...

- Of course, you give me such a gift,

I really appreciate it, so thank you.

- Absolutely, nothing may come up,

but please do feel free to reach out to me

you know what I'm saying as we're...

- Yeah, I am very good, this has been...

This is great, this is wonderful.

So thank you, okay, all right.

Bye y'all, thank you.

- Thanks.

- Thank you again to Dr. Lamb, that was great.

I have a lot to think about,

and thank you for watching.

We are scheduled to do a part two of this video

where Dr. Lamb and I will kind of recap

what we went through

and discuss some of the things that came up

during this mock therapy session.

If you're interested in seeing that video,

make sure you subscribe

and give a thumbs up to this video.

It also helps share this content

with more people who could need it.

If you did make it all the way to the end,

leave me a comment,

letting me know that made it through the entire video.

Thank you for being here

and remember whatever you're going through, you got this.

Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below for more information

on how to access this full series

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a med circle doctor a question directly,

you can learn how by visiting the links

in the description below.

(logo swoosh)

