- Of what we know for when we were kids

and previous generations,

we need to put that aside and we need to look

at the statistics and the dangers that are increasing,

cause this is black and white,

increase severe depression we know,

increase productivity in life.

We know in children right now.

So forget about that stoic mentality of when we were kids,

just get over it, and we have to address it.

I don't care what our ego tells us.

You have to address children differently.

When we're talking about depression

you look at the diagnostic manual.

As opposed to adults, we're talking about kids ranging

from four or five, to 17.

There is an enormous amount of developmental change

that takes place throughout that time period.

A five-year-old, hardly presents the same way,

as a 17 year old. - Yeah.

- What we tend to notice is,

preadolescence tends to be more irritable and oppositional

and defiant, and just a difficult child,

leading to a depressive diagnosis

but that's going to be that tip of the iceberg.

As you start to get higher and higher into the age range,

you may see more of the typical signs of depression

like they look sad, they look down, they are isolating,

they are crying.

They may be able to communicate with you a little bit

like, 'My life's sucks.'

So that's gonna change.

Don't forget and we've talked about this,

behavior is the manifestation of an underlying issue, okay?

- That's really good.

Really drive that point home because

we did in the ODD series,

but really drive it home for these viewers

cause that was a big game changer for me.

- Right so behavior is the surface of the iceberg,

that's what you're seeing.

That's that surface of the iceberg, right?

I see this behavior and the behavior is, agitation,

acting anxious or throwing a temper tantrum or talking back,

or, isolating themselves for a little while

or not wanting to go to school,

not wanting to go to practice.

But underneath it all the reason they don't

wanna do these things is because they don't have the energy

or the motivation, or they feel that it's hopeless

or they feel that it has no meaning anymore.

That's the underlying theme to why they're acting that way.

So you have to take that little tidbit of

that manifestation of behavior and say,

"All right, there's something going on here,

so let's look into it."

You see things like decreased interest in things.

I've had kids in my practice that present

and the parents would say,

"I don't know what his problem is

he's being so defiant, he's an all-state swimmer,

he just don't wanna go to practice anymore,

he just don't wanna go."

- Did my parents come see you?

cause that's really...

- I had no idea that that was you,

but I had a patient like that.

And they're saying, "I don't know,

is he just rebelling?

Is he just rebelling because we're encouraging him

to do this?"

And after I spoke with him,

I realized that this kid is depressed.

Because he was saying to me, "Doc what's the point?"

It really has no meaning to me anymore.

I don't enjoy it anymore I don't care if I win or lose

I just don't care."

This is of course a big one and very obvious,

talking about death and talking about life

and what's the meaning, the sense of hopelessness,

dealing with that case I realized

that he was a depressed guy and treating his depression,

helped him and he went on to be a really successful athlete.

And that's not even that important

the most important thing is that he was happy, right?

Right of course he was happy again.

You may see a change in energy levels.

All of a sudden they just don't have energy,

the same energy that they had.

You're gonna see a change in sleeping habits.

In another case,

I'll see a child that they're saying,

they're being resistant, they're avoiding school,

they don't wanna go to school in the morning.

And you know, you talk to the child and you realize,

again, they're just sad and depressed

and they feel no motivation.

They have what's called lassitude

where they just can't get ready.

They can't get out of bed and take a shower

and get prepared and get dressed,

and go through the structure of a school day,

because they don't have the energy or the motivation

or the desire and they feel that there's no purpose.

Now that being said,

there are a lot of other reasons

that they might not wanna go to school and

that can be an anxiety disorder,

it could be oppositional defiant disorder,

it could be rebellion.

But, my point is seeing that change in behavior,

may lead to a depression diagnosis.

- I really like this idea and this realization

that if your child is screaming and yelling,

what parents wanna do is fix the screaming and yelling,

- Right.

- So they punish the kid for screaming and yelling,

or they may be even worse reinforce the kid with a

toy or something to stop the screaming and yelling.

But we're not addressing why the kid is screaming

and yelling in the first place,

which could be depression or anxiety

or something like that.

- Well said, perfectly said.

And I'm gonna take it a step further and say that

if you're just decreasing the screaming and yelling

by providing some sort of tangible reward,

then they learn, that all I have to do is scream and yell

I'm gonna get what I want,

and the truth of the matter is,

getting that tangible reward is not gonna

ultimately make them happy,

it's gonna be a very temporary fix,

but that underlying isolation and depression is gonna grow.

Which is why you don't wanna do that.

You got to get to that underneath.

And I remember seeing this photo,

I bet everyone has seen this picture of the iceberg, right?

- Oh yeah.

- Where there's like the tip of the iceberg out

and there's huge, huge iceberg underneath.

I think that's a perfect analogy to something

like depression and how kids will present with it.

The preadolescence don't have the ability to understand

what they're experiencing and don't have the ability

to communicate it clearly, which you have to be

a very, very good observer as a parent

to pick up on those things.

The adolescent we talked about,

the average mood swings that kids have

and they do have that.

But if you start to notice

that they're not attending school,

they're not spending time with their friends

the way they used to.

They're not doing things that they enjoyed,

they're locking themselves in their rooms,

their sleep habits have changed

their eating habits have changed,

those are all signs of depression.

- Thanks for watching.

Check out the links below for more information

on how to access this full series

and subscribe to our YouTube channel

to watch new mental health videos every week.

Did you like what you heard in this video?

If you wanna ask a MedCircle doctor a question directly,

you can learn how by visiting the links

in the description below.

